                          LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS


Philip Alexander is Professor of Post-Biblical Jewish Studies at the University
of Manchester.

Friedrich Avemarie is Professor of New Testament at the University of Marburg.

John Barclay is Lightfoot Professor of Divinity at the University of Durham.

Gabriele Boccaccini is Professor of Near Eastern Studies at the University of
Michigan.

Troels Engberg-Pedersen is Professor of New Testament at the University of
Copenhagen.

Simon Gathercole is Senior Lecturer in New Testament at the University of
Aberdeen.

J. Louis Martyn is Edward Robinson Professor Emeritus of Biblical Theology,
Union Theological Seminary, New York.

Francis Watson is the Kirby Laing Professor of New Testament Exegesis at the
University of Aberdeen.

Stephen Westerholm is Professor of New Testament at McMaster University.
                LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS


AJSR      Association for Jewish Studies Review
ANRW      H. Temporini and W. Haase (eds.), Aufstieg und Niedergang der
          römischen Welt: Geschichte und Kultur Roms im Spiegel der neueren
          Forschung (Berlin, 1972–)
BDB       Brown, F., S. R. Driver and C. A. Briggs, A Hebrew and English Lexicon
          of the Old Testament (Oxford, 1907)
BNTC      Black’s New Testament Commentaries
BZAW      Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft
CBQ       Catholic Biblical Quarterly
CBQMS     Catholic Biblical Quarterly Monograph Series
ConBNT    Coniectanea neotestamentica
CRINT     Compendia rerum iudaicarum ad Novum Testamentum
DJD       Discoveries in the Judaean Desert
GCFI      Giorriale Critico della Filosoﬁa Italiana
HAL       Koehler, L., W. Baumgartner and J. J. Stamm. Hebräisches und
          aramäisches Lexikon zum Alten Testamen (1967–95)
HTR       Harvard Theological Review
HUCA      Hebrew Union College Annual
IBS       Irish Biblical Studies
ICC       International Critical Commentary
JAAR      Journal of the American Academy of Religion
JJS       Journal of Jewish Studies
JSJ       Journal for the Study of Judaism in the Persian, Hellenistic, and Roman
          Periods
JSNT      Journal for the Study of the New Testament
LCL       Loeb Classical Library
LSJ       Liddell, H. G., R. Scott, H. S. Jones, A Greek-English Lexicon (9th edn
          with revised supplement; Oxford, 1996)
LXX       Septuagint
NTS       New Testament Studies
RevB      Revue biblique
RevQ      Revue de Qumran
SP        Studia philonica
STDJ      Studies on the Texts of the Desert of Judah
Str.-B.   Strack, H. L. and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament aus
          Talmud und Midrasch (6 vols.; Munich, 1922–1961)
SVF       H. von Arnim, Stoicorum veterum fragmenta (4 vols. Leipzig 1903–24)
TSAJ      Texte und Studien zum antiken Judentum
TynBul    Tyndale Bulletin
VT        Vetus Testamentum
WUNT      Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament
                            Abbreviations                                           ix

ZNW          Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft und die Kunde der
             älteren Kirche
ZTK          Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche


                             Ancient texts
1 En.        1 Enoch
2 Bar.       2 Baruch
Abr.         Philo, De Abrahamo
Ant.         Josephus, Jewish Antiquities
Apoc. Abr.   Apocalypse of Abraham
Apoc. Mos.   Apocalypse of Moses
Avod. Zar.   Avodah Zarah
b.           Babylonian Talmud
B. Metzia    Baba Metzia
Ber.         Berakoth
Cher.        Philo, De cherubim
Conf.        Philo, De confusione linguarum
Decal.       Philo, De decalogo
Det.         Philo, Quod deterius potiori insidari soleat
Deus         Philo, Quod Deus sit immutabilis
Diss.        Epictetus, Dissertationes
Ebr.         Philo, De ebrietate
Ep. Ar.      Epistle of Aristeas
Eruv.        Eruvin
Fug.         Philo, De fuga et inventione
Gen. Rab.    Genesis Rabbah
Hag.         Hagigah
Her.         Philo, Quis rerum divinarum heres
Jub.         Jubilees
LAB          Pseudo-Philo, Biblical Antiquities
Lam. Rab.    Lamentations Rabbah
Leg.         Philo, Legum Allegoriae
Lev. Rab.    Leviticus Rabbah
m.           Mishnah
Migr.        Philo, De migratione Abrahami
Mut.         Philo, De mutatione nominum
Neg.         Nega‘im
Opif.        Philo, De opificio mundi
Post.        Philo, De posteritate Caini
Praem.       Philo, De praemiis et poenis
Prob.        Philo, Quod omnis probus liber sit
Pss. Sol.    Psalms of Solomon
Qidd.        Qiddushin
QG           Philo, Quaestiones et solutiones in Genesin
Rosh Hash.   Rosh Hashanah
Sacr.        Philo, De sacrificiis Abelis et Caini
Sanh.        Sanhedrin
Shabb.       Shabbat
Somn.        Philo, De somniis
x             Divine and Human Agency in Paul

Spec.       Philo, De specialibus legibus
Sukk.       Sukkah
t.          Tosefta
T. Abr.     Testament of Abraham
T. Ash.     Testament of Asher
T. Benj.    Testament of Benjamin
T. Dan      Testament of Dan
T. Iss.     Testament of Issachar
T. Job      Testament of Job
T. Jos.     Testament of Joseph
T. Jud.     Testament of Judah
T. Levi     Testament of Levi
T. Naph.    Testament of Naphtali
T. Reub.    Testament of Reuben
T. Sim.     Testament of Simeon
T. Zeb.     Testament of Zebulun
Tg. Neof.   Targum Neofiti
Virt.       Philo, De virtutibus
Vita        Life of Adam and Eve
War         Josephus, Jewish War
y.          Jerusalem Talmud
                                    Chapter 1

                                INTRODUCTION

                              John M. G. Barclay


Paul’s letters contain a number of statements regarding agency which have
engaged the attention of serious thinkers right down the centuries. Most careful
readers have detected in Paul a radical view of the insufﬁciency of human agents
– their incapacity to do God’s will and their enslavement by supra-human powers.
The antithesis between divine grace and human ‘works’ (e.g., Rom. 4.4–6; 9.6–
13; 11.6, if understood in generalizable terms) has made Paul the key spokesman
for the unconditionality of divine initiative in salvation; Paul’s vehemence in
argumentation on this point has encouraged hefty polemics against any hint that
human achievement could accomplish redemption or even contribute to it. Simi-
larly, the strong Pauline statements about the power of ‘sin’ and the captivity of
the self, even of the will (Rom. 7.7–25), have spawned a tradition of deep pes-
simism about Adamic humanity, which has surfaced perhaps most powerfully
at those times of cultural change inhabited and engendered by Augustine and
Luther.
    Moreover, some of Paul’s statements on the relation of divine to human agency
strike us as paradoxical, if not downright incoherent. He urges the Philippians,
for instance: ‘Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for God is
at work in you, both to will and to work for his good pleasure’ (Phil. 2.12–13). In
statements such as this (cf. 1 Cor. 15.9–10) we are perplexed by the juxtaposition
of two agencies: that of the Philippians, the recipient of Paul’s exhortation, who
are clearly responsible for their ‘work’, and that of God, whose ‘work’ is taken
to be not independent of theirs, but in some sense the source of their action, even
of their will to act. Hence these two agencies are not simply juxtaposed, as if they
were independent contributors to a common effort, but brought into a logical
relation to one another: the human imperative (the exhortation to ‘work’) is based
upon a divine indicative (‘God is at work’), the two connected by a logical con-
junction (‘for’, ICT).
    Following this lead, we quickly discover further layers of complexity in Paul’s
discourse on agency. On the one hand, his letters are full of statements which
state or presuppose that human beings are capable and effective agents, responsi-
ble for their own actions. He bemoans human sin as ‘disobedience’, and speaks
of God’s judgment and wrath in ways that presuppose human guilt and human
responsibility. He also cajoles, exhorts and instructs his converts as if they were
2                           Divine and Human Agency in Paul

both capable of, and responsible for, their own activity. On the other hand, he
speaks as if God’s agency is effective everywhere, even in cases where humans
are said to work. On the negative side, human sin is correlated with God ‘hand-
ing them over’ (Rom. 1.24, 26, 28); on the positive, human righteousness is
identiﬁed with the leading of the Spirit (Gal. 5.18). Yet, even where all is of
grace, human agency is not effaced: the dialectic of 1 Cor. 15.9–10 suggests that
divine and human agency are not necessarily correlated to one another in inverse
proportion.
    If such statements and structures of thought strike us as paradoxical, we are
not the ﬁrst to be so struck. In the long and rich history of reception of Paul, his
statements on agency have spawned extremely violent debates – most notably
in Augustine’s debates with Pelagius, and subsequently in numerous disputes
between Protestants and Catholics, internal arguments among Catholic theologi-
ans, and bitter controversies between Protestant sects. Each side has accused the
other of deforming Christian discourse by one-sided recourse to Paul, sometimes
with good reason, sometimes without. The repetitiveness of these debates since
the Reformation might lead us to wonder if anything more can usefully be said
on this topic. Should the study of Pauline theology simply accept that there is here
a constellation of deep and irresolvable conundra and move on to other terrain?
    This book constitutes a claim that agency issues are neither stale nor unin-
teresting, and that fresh light can be shed on this central issue in Pauline theology
by adopting a well-tuned comparative approach. In fact, there are two elements
of the current intellectual climate which make this an opportune moment to reex-
amine Paul’s understanding of agency.
    1. The last generation of Pauline scholarship, where it has considered Pauline
theology, has circled back in part to questions of agency, after temporarily losing
interest in such matters. E. P. Sanders’ reconﬁguration of the relationship between
Paul and Second Temple Judaism persuaded many scholars that the terms adopted
in the old debates were wholly inapt. Paul was not distinguished from Judaism by
his emphasis on divine grace, in contrast to Jewish concern with human works.
Jewish covenantal nomism was founded on divine mercy in election, and Paul
had nothing particularly striking to say on grace and human works, at least noth-
ing different from the ways those themes were correlated in his contemporary
Judaism.1 The subsequent ‘new perspective’, interpreting Paul’s remarks on
‘works’ as (Jewish) culture-speciﬁc and ungeneralizable, undercut the whole tra-
dition of interpretation which found in Paul a programmatic distinction between
divine and human agency. A further generation of study of Second Temple
Judaism has conﬁrmed Sanders’ charge that older treatments of Judaism often
traded in caricature; but it has also started to challenge the tendency to har-
monization in his own treatment of the sources, and to reimagine Second Temple
Judaism as a family of vigorous disputes on almost all essential points of theol-
ogy and practice, including the topics of ‘covenant’ and ‘nomism’. This makes it
possible to reposition Paul not as a lonely ﬁgure in dispute with the central tenets


    1.   E. P. Sanders, Paul and Palestinian Judaism (London: SCM Press, 1977), pp. 515–18, 543.
                                  BARCLAY Introduction                                          3

of all contemporary Jews, but as a maverick participant in a lively Jewish (and
speciﬁcally Christian–Jewish) dialogue, closer to some fellow Jews on certain
issues, but distinguished from them on points he may share with other Jews. And
among the issues in which he shares elements of common ground and aspects of
disagreement may be his understanding of ‘grace’, of divine priority and of the
nature and role of human agency.2
    Two nodal points in recent debates on Pauline theology have brought the
question of agency to the fore. In his fresh interpretation of Pauline ‘apocalyp-
tic’, J. L. Martyn has emphasized the signiﬁcance in Pauline theology of the
powers which enslave humanity, and of the power of grace which liberates the
human will, though it is not now made autonomous or independent. Thus Paul’s
ethical instructions, Martyn insists, operate within the framework of powers
which enlist humanity in their service, the power of the Flesh or the power of the
Spirit.3 An alternative reading of Paul, by T. Engberg-Pedersen, has questioned
how one should interpret Pauline language of this sort, redirecting attention to
Paul’s interest in human cognition and its ethical results.4 The mutual engage-
ment of these two readings reopens conversation about what sense we should
give to Pauline locutions which juxtapose and correlate divine and human agency.5
Concurrent, but not symmetrical, with this debate has been a vigorous dispute
about the Pauline phrase RKUVKL :TKUVQW, whose appearance at pivotal points in
Paul’s arguments (e.g., Gal. 2.16; Rom. 3.22; Phil. 3.9) has elicited sharp divi-
sion of opinion between those who ﬁnd here christological agency (the faith or
faithfulness of Christ) and those who see human ‘agency’ in faith (faith in Christ)
as the immediate referent.6 Lurking behind this debate are large but sometimes
ill-focused theological convictions, and an Augustinian or Protestant anxiety lest
human agency be thought to diminish the all-sufﬁciency and sovereignty of the
divine agent. If this debate appears to have reached a stalemate, can one approach
the issue with fresh eyes by placing it in the larger framework of Paul’s under-
standings of agency?
    2. If the ‘post-modern’ turn has taught us anything, it is that many of the
‘obvious’ assumptions of modernity are historically conditioned: they express a
conceptuality that may be neither necessary nor helpful in considering either the

   2. On the complexities within rabbinic Judaism, see F. Avemarie, Tora und Leben (Tübingen:
Mohr Siebeck, 1996). On Paul as in multi-faceted agreement and disagreement with fellow Jews on
the interpretation of Scripture, see F. Watson, Paul and the Hermeneutics of Faith (London: T&T
Clark, 2004). Some elements of diversity in Second Temple Judaism in this sphere are discussed in
D. A. Carson, P. O’Brien and M. Seifrid (eds.), Justiﬁcation and Variegated Nomism, vol. 1: The
Complexities of Second Temple Judaism (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2001), though the Summaries
and Conclusions at the close of the book are not representative of the whole.
   3. J. L. Martyn, Galatians. A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary (AB; New
York; Doubleday, 1997), pp. 479–84.
   4. T. Engberg-Pedersen, Paul and the Stoics (Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 2000).
   5. See the discussion between Martyn and Engberg-Pedersen in JSNT 86 (2002), pp. 61–114.
   6. See the main areas of the debate as set out in E. E. Johnson and D. M. Hays (eds.), Pauline
Theology, vol. 4: Looking Back, Pressing On (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1997), pp. 35–92. Among
the complexities of this debate is the question of the extent to which, where he does speak of the
believer’s faith, Paul considers this an ‘action’ comparable to other instances of human agency.
4                           Divine and Human Agency in Paul

future of our race or its pre-modern traditions. With regard to agency, the simi-
larities of language between ancient debates and modern discussions of free will
and determinism often, it seems, mask fundamental differences of conceptuality.
For instance, the modern association of human agency and responsibility with
notions of independence and autonomy – especially in relation to the divine – can
be shown to be the construct of a particularly modern phase in the history of
thought.7 This is certainly not transferable – at least not wholesale – to pre-
modern conceptualities.8 Thus, if we are to understand how it was possible for
Paul to relate divine and human agency, we may have to ‘unthink’ many of our
contemporary assumptions on this topic, in the effort to place his statements in
their own historical context. That context, as we know, was complex and multi-
faceted. Since Paul was a Jew who manifestly drew off scriptural and other
Jewish resources, he clearly must be studied alongside other Jewish thinkers of
his era, though without any presumption about the extent of their unanimity on
this topic. Indeed, Josephus’ comments on the differences of opinion among
Jewish ‘philosophies’ on fate and free will (Ant. 13.172–73; 18.12–18), while
over-simpliﬁed, certainly encourage us to expect that the debates among Jews
were both signiﬁcant and complex.9 But since his thought, and that of many of
his contemporary Jews, was also constructively engaged (to varying degrees)
with the intellectual currents of the late Hellenistic and early Roman world, the
contextual analysis can hardly exclude non-Jewish materials.10 What is important
here is the effort to understand Paul within his own intellectual landscape, rather
than transporting him into our own, where an alien and anachronistic structure of
discourse may deeply distort our understanding of his thought. (The same rule
applies, of course, to other early Christian authors, who have had to be omitted
here to give this project necessary focus.) This is not to deny that Paul may have
a highly signiﬁcant contribution to make to contemporary theology, only to insist

   7. See J. B. Schneewind, The Invention of Autonomy. A History of Modern Moral Philosophy
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
   8. See K. Tanner, God and Creation in Christian Theology. Tyranny or Empowerment? (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1988).
   9. The former passage is worth citing in full (in Marcus’s translation): ‘As for the Pharisees,
they say that certain events are the work of Fate, but not all; as to other events, it depends upon
ourselves whether they shall take place or not. The sect of the Essenes, however, declares that Fate
is mistress of all things, and that nothing befalls men unless it be in accordance with her decree. But
the Sadducees do away with Fate, holding that there is no such thing and that human actions are not
achieved in accordance with her decree, but that all things lie within our power, so that we our-
selves are responsible for our well-being , while we suffer misfortune through our own thought-
lessness’. To what extent, or in what ways, we can line up the other evidence from Second Temple
Judaism with this schema is a difﬁcult matter to resolve (see, e.g., Sirach 15.11–20). We may
certainly suspect Josephus of assimilating his Jewish ‘philosophies’ to the well-known schools of
thought in late Hellenism, but we have sufﬁcient independent evidence to know that there were real
differences of emphasis among Second Temple Jews on the role of human agency in historical
affairs, and the role of evil forces in corrupting humanity. Josephus’ comment seems to be repack-
aging (and perhaps distorting) some real state of affairs.
   10. For the methodological point see T. Engberg-Pedersen (ed.), Paul beyond the Juda-
ism/Hellenism Divide (Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press, 2001).
                                   BARCLAY Introduction                                            5

that we do not make him speak our language until we have learned the grammar
and structures of his own.
   The essays in this collection represent a collaborative effort to understand
agency as a structural element in Pauline theology, by placing him within select
features of his cultural context. The opening chapters are devoted to early Juda-
ism with only tangential reference to Paul: authentic Religionsgeschichte requires
the attempt to understand a cultural context on its own terms, not just as the
‘background’ to a single historical ﬁgure.11 A survey of intellectual currents in
Second Temple Judaism (Boccaccini) provides an overview of the varieties of
theology within the family of Judaism, resulting in different emphases in regard
to agency. Two bodies of Jewish texts which give special attention to the
question of agency are then explored – the Dead Sea Scrolls (Alexander) and
the rabbinic corpus (Avemarie) – whose differing construals of agency bear
further witness to the intricacies of our topic. A three-way comparison between
4QMMT, Paul and 4 Maccabees (Watson) demonstrates how antithetical struc-
tures of thought within contiguous Jewish literature take shape within the speci-
ﬁc rhetorics and logics of each text, while the range of Jewish views on human
capacity to offer obedience to God is explored, with emphasis on Paul’s extrem-
ism (Westerholm). If the relation of grace and human agency is a central topic in
Paul, it is also so in Philo, and comparison can show just where they do and do
not differ (Barclay). Similarly, we may consider other currents in early Roman
culture, where close analysis of Epictetus can serve to highlight the Stoic logics
regarding our theme (Engberg-Pedersen). Our ﬁnal essay focuses more exclu-
sively on Pauline texts, concerning human agency and sin (Gathercole). All these
essays were ﬁrst presented and discussed in an intense and highly productive
colloquium at the University of Aberdeen in August 2004, funded jointly by the
University of Aberdeen and the British Academy. All have been revised in the
light of those discussions, among whose highlights were the responses and
interjections of J. L. Martyn; these have been gathered and adapted to form the
tail-piece of this collection, highlighting the central issues at stake and the
advances which have (or have not!) been made in the intellectual endeavour
represented by this volume.
   Pervasive in our debates, and in these essays, is a double question: what do we
mean by ‘agency’? And, what are the available models for understanding the
relationship between divine and human agencies? Concerning the ﬁrst, we are
aware of a nexus of forms of human agency involving the capacity to know, to
desire/will and to act. Some of the texts studied here will emphasize one factor
more than another – or stress the distinction between the capacity of human agency
and its actuality. At the same time there can be stronger or weaker versions of
human freedom advanced – to be free is not necessarily to be independent or
autonomous (in a modern sense), and a voluntary act is not necessarily at the
same time spontaneous (in the sense of being wholly self-initiated). Thus there


   11. In the ﬁeld of New Testament studies, the point has been rightly stressed, and ably practised,
by A. Malherbe; see, e.g., ‘Hellenistic Moralists and the New Testament’, ANRW II.26.1: 268–333.
6                           Divine and Human Agency in Paul

can be simpler or more complex notions of human responsibility, accountability
and causation. The same applies, and with greater range, in relation to the
divine. God’s agency may be direct or indirect and may be conceptualized in
stronger or weaker forms, ranging from absolute predetermination through fore-
knowledge, intention, enabling and permission. God can be the subject of many
types of verb and God’s agency conceived through both personalist and imper-
sonal metaphors.
   Given this range of possibilities, regarding both the human and the divine,
discussion of our topic may be expected to be both intricate and varied. But our
second question introduces a different order of variables, since it concerns the
structures of thought which operate in considering the relation of divine to
human agency. In some cases our texts may neither exhibit nor imply any struc-
tural correlation: the juxtaposition of divine and human agency may arise from
rhetorical needs, combining statements of piety, on the one hand, with moral
exhortation, on the other.12 But where some correlation is either implicit or ex-
plicit, it may be shaped by one of the following three models:
   1. The ﬁrst model – and the one that occurs most naturally to the modern mind
– places divine and human agency in an essentially competitive relationship: the
more that one is said to be effective, the less can be attributed to the other.
Because they operate in inverse proportion, the greater the afﬁrmation of God’s
power (in strength or scope), the more inconsequential must be human agency;
and conversely, the more human agency is increased, the more God’s agency is
limited. Divine sovereignty and human freedom are thus mutually exclusive;
human freedom must be understood as freedom from God. The two agencies are
also regarded as in principle independent of one another.13 Even when they
cooperate in producing a single effect, this is the convergence of two independent
agencies; and the human agency involved is solely responsible for its own share
of the action. Whatever is attributed to free human agency must block or reduce
divine agency, since God is, in effect, one agent among others in the same causal
matrix. Even where God is regarded as the originator of the causal chain, the
human respondents act from their own self-initiated wills, since the integrity of
that will can be maintained only if it is in some respects or at some points
independent of the direct creative will of God. Divine and human agency thus
stand over against one another as polar opposites, even when they collaborate as
partial causes of the same effect.
   2. The second model presents divine and human agency as related to one
another by kinship. God and humanity are here within the same spectrum of
being, and the agency of one is shared with the other, rather than standing in
competition against it. Human agency is bound up with that of God, because the

  12. The rhetorical dimensions of Paul’s language (as of all our texts), his use of agency lan-
guage to persuade, comfort or cajole, is clearly be to kept in mind throughout. But it is unnecessary
and unhelpful to allow ‘rhetoric’ and ‘truth-claims’ to be played off against one another.
  13. For the force of this emphasis, especially in Kant, for whom free agency excludes any
notion of dependence on, or slavery to, another, see Schneewind, Invention, pp. 508–30. Thus our
question became entangled with the larger debate between ‘religion’ and ‘humanism’.
                                BARCLAY Introduction                                        7

two are essentially identical when properly aligned. Although God may be said to
be transcendent in a limited way – in superior power or range – the two agencies
are in key respects equal and akin, since human agency is a portion of that of
God. On this model human freedom is certainly not freedom from God, but is
exercised precisely by acting in accordance with God. Humanity is most itself
not when it is ‘self-sufﬁcient’ vis-à-vis God, but when it acts in dependence on
God, and wills what God has willed. For human beings participate in the nature
of God, and might even be described as ‘fragments’ of God: what makes them
most effective as human agents is what they share with God.
    3. The third model presents divine agency in terms of non-contrastive tran-
scendence. Here divine agency is certainly not in principle exclusive of human
agency: transcendence is not viewed in contrastive terms. God’s sovereignty does
not limit or reduce human freedom, but is precisely what grounds and enables it.
The two agencies thus stand in direct, and not inverse proportion: the more the
human agent is operative, the more (not the less) may be attributed to God. As
K. Tanner insists, ‘a non-contrastive transcendence of God suggests an extreme
of divine involvement with the world – a divine involvement in the form of a
productive agency extending to everything that is in an equally direct manner’.14
But divine transcendence also here implies agencies that are non-identical: God
is radically distinct from human agency and not an agent within the same order
of being or in the same causal nexus. Thus human agency is neither an empty
shell for divine power, nor a threat to divine agency (as in model 1) – nor ulti-
mately identical to divine agency (model 2). Rather, created human agencies are
founded in, and constituted by, the divine creative agency, while remaining dis-
tinct from God. God’s unconditional sovereignty is here operative with regard to
creatures who have their own will and their own freedom. But that created (or,
newly created) freedom,15 which may be ‘horizontally’ independent of other cre-
ated agencies, stands in a ‘vertical’ relationship of absolute dependence on divine
agency. Other agents may affect human agency, but it is God who effects it, who
constitutes its effectiveness as an agent. Hence, if God is everything, humanity is
nothing without God – but may be both powerful and effective as a created agent
in dependence on God.
    These three models of agency should be retained as live options in interpret-
ing the logical structures of the texts we study; and if the modern mind slips by
default into the ﬁrst it is all the more important to keep the other two alive in our
consciousness. Our texts may, of course, be confused or opaque, and will cer-
tainly be more complex than these bare schemas suggest. In many, for instance,
other non-human agencies are also discussed, such as the Prince of Darkness, or
the power of Sin. These may not enjoy the sort of transcendence one can attribute
to a divine creative agent, but they may certainly corrupt human agency in sig-
niﬁcant ways. As we shall see, not all the ancient texts wrestle with the question

   14. Tanner, God and Creation, 46; although she does not use this threefold schema, I am
indebted to Tanner’s work for many of the concepts and some of the vocabulary here employed.
   15. The qualiﬁcation reﬂects the Pauline stress on the human agent as newly constituted ‘in
Christ’.
8                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

of divine and human agency as a problem, at least not in the ways in which we
perceive the issue as problematic today; they may not consider paradoxical what
seems so to us. But a number do reﬂect interestingly on the roots and structures
of agency, and among those, with their own particular contribution, stand the
letters of Paul. Within the scope of these essays we clearly cannot resolve all
the literary, historical, theological and philosophical problems in our topic. But
we hope to illuminate and clarify central elements in our theme, rid ourselves of
some common misperceptions, and thus make better sense both of Paul and of
his original cultural context.16




  16. My thanks to Simon Gathercole, J. Louis Martyn and Troels Engberg-Pedersen for their
advice in composing this introduction.
                                        Chapter 2

       INNER-JEWISH DEBATE ON THE TENSION BETWEEN DIVINE
          AND HUMAN AGENCY IN SECOND TEMPLE JUDAISM

                                 Gabriele Boccaccini

  Introduction: My Grandmother’s Picture Box and Marc Bloch’s Ogre
The status of Second Temple Jewish literature reminds me of the old box where
my grandmother used to put, higgledy-piggledy, the pictures of her huge family
(eleven siblings, and an uncounted number of uncles and aunts, great-uncles and
great-aunts, cousins, friends and relatives – all smiling together). In the box there
were, along with a large number of scattered pictures, also some albums contain-
ing collections or ‘canons’ of pictures that my grandmother had put together
according to the most diverse criteria (format, her favourites, inheritance from
some other relatives, or just chance).
    Since I was a child, I was captivated by the curiosity of reconstructing the
genealogical tree of my family. By instinct I tried ﬁrst to free the pictures from
the cages of their corpora and put them in a single line according to the chrono-
logical order. But even so, they did not make much sense, as the pictures por-
trayed generations of individuals, who often lived simultaneously. I had to group
together the pictures that portrayed the same individuals, if I wanted those
individuals to become alive again. It was not a simple task, as I realized imme-
diately. Only in a few cases was I able to relate the information I received from
the pictures with what I knew from family stories or other sources. The pictures
then portrayed people at different stages of their lives and it was not easy to
recognize in that shy baby the bold ofﬁcer and pilot who died in World War I, or
to ﬁnd any resemblance between that old severe lady and the young girl full of
life and beauty. The family likeness complicated the situation even further, since
many times it caused me to mistake one character for another. But soon I had
created my own ‘communities of pictures’, which replaced my grandmother’s old
albums of blessed memory and gave some (tentative, yet more satisfactory) order
to the messy picture collection.
    Writing an intellectual history of Second Temple Judaism is very much like
reconstructing the genealogical tree of a large family.1 We have documents instead

  1.   G. Boccaccini, ‘Middle Judaism: Judaism between the 3rd Century BCE and the 2nd Century
CE as a Historiographical Unit’, in idem, Middle Judaism: Jewish Thought, 300 BCE to 200 CE
(Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1991); idem, ‘Middle Judaism and Its Contemporary Interpreters:
10                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

of pictures, and historical accounts instead of family stories. Documents, like
family pictures, must be studied each on its own terms, within the broader social
and intellectual framework provided by other sources. A common-denominator
approach would only conﬂate data from different documents to shape a single,
eclectic subject (the theology of Second Temple Judaism) that never existed, while
dismissing the individual traits (the conﬂicting pieces of evidence) as marginal and
negligible phenomena, only because they do not conform to the majority. On the
other hand, an excessive emphasis on diversity would lead us to the opposite
extreme of seeing documents in isolation from each other, as representatives of as
many diverse subjects, not as portraits of the same subjects at different stages of
their existence. We face neither a single subject, nor an incalculable number of
subjects, but genealogies of subjects (the diverse and competing theologies of
Second Temple Judaism). We should not be misled by the family likeness or the
abundance of parallels. This was well stated by E. P. Sanders: ‘One may consider
the analogy of two buildings. Bricks which are identical in shape, colour, and
weight could well be used to construct two different buildings which are totally
unlike each other’.2 The identiﬁcation of ‘communities of texts’, representing the
diverse and competing trajectories of thought in Second Temple Judaism, is the
major goal and the major challenge in the study of the period. It is not an easy task.
We meet so many cases of false resemblance, forgetfulness, mistaken identity and
rejection (ﬁrst of all, the anachronistic separation between Jewish and Christian
documents). Yet, it is an inescapable task, if we want, for example, to understand
where each member of the family stood in the inner-Jewish debate on the tension
between human and divine agency, which is the case of this paper, as well as on
any other controversial issue.3
   ‘The good historian resembles the ogre of the fairy-tale; where he scents the
human ﬂesh, he knows that his prey is there’.4 Marc Bloch’s witty remark
reminds us that ours is a dirty job that has not to do with an anonymous and
aseptic ‘common Judaism’ but with the actual lives and the temperamental
behaviour of ﬂesh-and-blood people who made up the Jewish family. In the
words of Eugenio Garin, the intellectual historian’s task is ‘to be aware of the
plurality of philosophies, understand the many voices, put them in context,

Methodological Foundations for the Study of Judaisms, 300 BCE to 200 CE’, Henoch 15 (1993), pp.
207–34; idem, ‘Middle Judaism and Its Contemporary Interpreters: What Makes Any Judaisms a
Judaism?’, Henoch 20 (1998), pp. 349–56; idem, ‘The Intellectual Quest of Rabbinic Origins and
Roots’, in idem, Roots of Rabbinic Judaism: An Intellectual History, from Ezekiel to Daniel (Grand
Rapids: Eerdmans, 2002), pp. 1–41.
   2. E. P. Sanders, Paul and Palestinian Judaism (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1977), p. 13; see
also S. Sandmel, ‘Parallelomania’, JBL 81 (1962), pp. 1–13.
   3. Diversity is recognized as one of the main features of Second Temple Judaism in all recent
introductions to the period, see P. Sacchi, History of the Second Temple (Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press,
2000); L. L. Grabbe, Judaic Religion in Second Temple Judaism (London: Routledge, 2000); G. W.
E. Nickelsburg, Ancient Judaism and Christian Origins: Diversity, Continuity, and Transformation
(Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2003).
   4. M. Bloch, Apologie pour l’histoire; ou, Métier d’historien (Paris: Colin, 1949), p. 35 (ET by
P. Putnam, The Historian’s Craft [New York: Knopf, 1953]).
                          BOCCACCINI Inner-Jewish Debate                                    11

identify the relations with the social groups in which they emerged, assess what
they meant for these groups, how they acted if they acted, how they changed, and
how they declined – human thoughts, how they were created by people, how they
changed people’.5 Marc Bloch’s ogre would have loved the smell of my grand-
mother’s picture box.


  1. The Earlier Generation (Zadokite, Sapiential and Enochic Judaism)
The surviving Jewish documents from the Persian and early Hellenistic period
can be grouped into three major trajectories of thought.6 The tripartition into
Zadokite, Enochic and Sapiential Judaism mirrors the sociological structure of
the post-exilic Jewish society (or, better, of its upper class). The House of Zadok
and their Aaronite allies dominated the temple and the religious life of Judah,
replacing the Davidic monarchy and silencing the prophets, but not without
internal struggle by those priestly families who were excluded and marginalized.
On the other hand, the presence of an autonomous foreign administration in
charge of political affairs, gave the proper setting for the survival of scribal
schools, where the wise ﬂourished.

a. Zadokite Judaism
The covenantal relationship between God and Israel, as understood by the
Zadokites, is a pact for the stability and welfare of the Jewish people, as well as
for the stability and welfare of the entire world, regulated by a complex system of
‘graded holiness’.7 As creation has set clear boundaries and rules to the cosmos
by separating heaven from the earth and the inhabited world (the land of Israel)
from the chaos of the ocean and the wilderness (Genesis 1), so the covenant is
the foundation of an orderly and balanced relationship between God and God’s
people, once again by providing precise and not arbitrary boundaries and rules.
The Jewish people agreed to submit themselves, collectively and individually,
to God’s law, including the hardship of punishment in case of transgression.
In return, God also agreed to put the divine power under the restraints of the
covenant, guaranteeing protection and well-being to the righteous and reacting
with justice and measure against the transgressors.
   The idea of a covenant between God and God’s people was not new. It had
already a long history that went far back into the polytheistic notion of con-
ditional pacts between a divine patron and his earthly allies. It was at the centre
of the monarchic ideology of an everlasting alliance between the God of Israel
and the house of David, according to the words of the prophet Nathan: ‘Your
house and your kingdom shall be made sure forever before me’ (2 Sam. 7.16). In

   5. E. Garin, ‘Osservazioni preliminari a una storia della ﬁlosoﬁa’, GCFI 38 (1959), pp. 1–55
(41).
   6. G. Boccaccini, ‘Zadokite Judaism and Its Opponents’, in idem, Roots of Rabbinic Judaism,
pp. 73–111.
   7. P. P. Jenson, Graded Holiness: A Key to the Priestly Conception of the World (JSOTSup,
106; Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld Academic Press, 1992).
12                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

the Zadokite worldview, the house of Zadok has taken the place of the house of
David, the priests have replaced the king’s prophets, and Aaron has superseded
Moses. God’s single exclusive temple, led by God’s single legitimate priesthood,
is ideally at the centre of the world. Its architecture and internal structure, its
hierarchically disposed personnel, and the regularity of its liturgical calendar were
intended to replicate the sacred geography of creation, the social hierarchy of
humankind, and the eternal times of the cosmos. The cult had the dual function of
maintaining and restoring the creative order, by reminding God of God’s com-
mitments and removing sin and impurity from the worshippers. The regularity of
the rituals was ultimately the main guarantee of the stability of the universe.8
    If not the creators of ‘covenantal nomism’, the Zadokites were however those
who ﬁrst perfected it into a coherent theological system seeking the perfect
balance between human and divine agency, between God’s and human freedom,
between God’s mercy and God’s justice. In the Zadokite interpretation of the
covenant, people’s accountability is enhanced and God’s discretion limited
according to Ezekiel’s principle: ‘The righteousness of the righteous shall be
his own, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be his own’ (Ezek. 18.20).
Chronicles’ revised version of the ancient monarchic historiography shows that
misfortune always follows transgression and well-being is always a sign of
obedience. Generation after generation, people can only blame themselves for
their physical and moral failures, and God can no longer miss or delay the chance
of punishing the wicked and rewarding the righteous.

b. Enochic Judaism
In spite of its accomplishments and undeniable authority, the Zadokite system
was not without its weak points as its critics would not fail to stress. Specialists
in ancient Jewish apocalypticism and mysticism concur in identifying the pres-
ence of a priestly opposition active in Jerusalem since the early Second Temple
period.9 We do not know what this party was called, or what it called itself in
antiquity. However, since this movement of dissent ﬁrst coalesced around ancient
myths with Enoch as their hero, the term ‘Enochic Judaism’ seems quite appro-
priate and satisfactory as a modern label.
   The catalyst of Enochic Judaism was a unique concept of the origin of evil
that made the fallen angels (the ‘sons of God’ also recorded in Gen. 6.1–4) as
ultimately responsible for the spread of evil and impurity on earth. ‘Sin and evil
originated not with God’s permission, but as the result of a rebellious conspiracy
that was hatched behind God’s back’.10 The cosmic rebellion of the fallen angels

   8. M. S. Jaffee, Early Judaism (Upper Saddle River: Prentice-Hall, 1997), pp. 164–72.
   9. P. Sacchi, Jewish Apocalyptic and Its History (Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press, 1997); G. Boccaccini
(ed.), The Origins of Enochic Judaism (Turin: Zamorani, 2002 [= Henoch 24, 2002]); G. W. E.
Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch: A Commentary (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2001); J. H. VanderKam,
Enoch and the Growth of an Apocalyptic Tradition (CBQMS, 16; Washington: Catholic Biblical
Association of America, 1984); idem, Enoch: A Man for All Generations (Columbia: University of
South Carolina, 1995); J. J. Collins, The Apocalyptic Imagination: An Introduction to Jewish
Apocalyptic Literature (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1998).
   10. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch, p. 47.
                           BOCCACCINI Inner-Jewish Debate                                      13

was not simply, as in the Mosaic Torah, one of the primaeval sins that char-
acterized the ancient history of humankind. By crossing the boundaries between
heaven and earth, the evil angels led by Semyaz and Azazel broke apart the
divisions set by God at the time of creation. According to the Book of the
Watchers, it was the mother of all sins, the original sin which corrupted and con-
taminated God’s creation and from which evil relentlessly continues to spring
forth and spread. As God said to the angel Raphael: ‘The whole earth has been
corrupted through the works that were taught by Azazel: to him ascribe all sin!’
(1 En. 6.8). In a cosmic battle, the rebellious angels were defeated by the good
angels and imprisoned in chains ‘in a hole in the desert which is in Dudael…
[until] the day of the great judgment’ (1 En. 6.4–6). The giants, the monstrous
offspring of the unnatural union between angels and women, were killed (1 En.
10.9–10), but their immortal souls survived as the evil spirits and continue to
roam about the earth (1 En. 15.8–10). As disturbing as this idea was, God’s
reaction limited but did not eradicate evil, until God will put an end to this evil
world and will create a new world qualitatively different from, and discontinuous
with, what was before.
   The theological attempt to absolve the merciful God from being responsible
for the presence of evil on earth leads to the conclusion that human beings are
less the perpetrators than they are the victims of evil. Human freedom and
responsibility are not denied but the importance of divine grace is enhanced.
Without God’s intervention humans would be totally at the mercy of evil, but
the rebellious power of evil limits the effectiveness of God’s intervention. The
Zadokite balance between human and divine agency is totally broken, the idea of
covenant disrupted by the presence of the third party, that of the devil, which acts
maliciously outside and against the rules of any covenant.

c. Sapiential Judaism
The Enochians were not the only opposition party in early Second Temple Juda-
ism. As attested by both Jeremiah (Jer. 18.18) and Ezekiel (Ezek. 7.26), the idea
of the Torah originated in pre-exilic times in a priestly setting, which competed
with the prophets and the wise.11 Unlike the prophets, who lost the social envir-
onment that fostered them, the wise remained a strong autonomous component in
post-exilic Jewish society.
   The criticism of Sapiential Judaism did not confront directly the authority and
stability of the Zadokite order but more subtly the foundations of their covenantal
theology. As in the early Enochic literature, the most striking feature in the early
documents of Sapiential Judaism (such as Proverbs) is the absence of any direct
reference to the Mosaic covenant. Here, the assumption is that human well-being
depends not on obedience to a covenant but on living in harmony with the order
(or Wisdom) of the universe, which God implanted there at the time of creation

   11. J. Blenkinsopp, Sage, Priest and Prophet: Religious and Intellectual Leadership in Ancient
Israel (Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1995); L. L. Grabbe, Priests, Prophets,
Diviners, Sages: A Socio-Historical Study of Religious Specialists in Ancient Israel (Valley Forge,
PA: Trinity, 1995).
14                       Divine and Human Agency in Paul

and of which all human beings have experience. This form of knowledge and
spirituality, which Sapiential Judaism called ‘the fear of God’, demands human
inquiry and initiative, rather than obedience to revealed laws or conformity to
any cultic act.
   The righteous and suffering Job denounces the idea of covenant as unfair
to God and to humans: to God, as it limits God’s autonomy and freedom; to
humans, as it gives them only an illusion of justice. What justice can humans
expect when the other party is at the same time partner and judge? ‘[God] is not a
mortal, as I am, that I might answer him: Let’s go to trial on us both. There is no
umpire between us, who might lay his hand on us both’ (Job 9.32–33). Job curses
the day he was born (Job 3.2).
   Jonah is disappointed at God’s mercy toward the Ninivites, no less than Job at
God’s wrath against his innocent servant: ‘I knew that you are a gracious God
and merciful…please take my life, for it is better for me to die than to live’ (Jon.
4.2–3). The recognition that God is not bound by any pronouncements is equally
unbearable for him.12
   The happy endings of Job and Jonah do not provide any answer to the doubts
of Sapiential Judaism. With Qohelet any residual semblance of compromise and
accommodation disappears. Irony turns into bitterness and sarcasm. Experience
shows that obeying the Zadokite covenant does not make any difference: ‘The
same fate comes to all, to all righteous and the wicked, to the good and the evil,
to the clean and the unclean, to those who sacriﬁce and those who do not
sacriﬁce. As are the good, so are the sinners’ (Eccl. 9.2; cf. 2.14).
   Sapiential Judaism does not attribute to God any wrongdoing or falsehood,
nor does it claim that God’s creation is in any way evil or corrupted. On the
contrary, their criticism is in the name of God’s absolute power. God cannot be
limited by a covenant, because God is Almighty. At any moment God has the
power, the right and the freedom to deviate from the established terms of God’s
relationship with humans. People have nothing to fear by God’s unbounded free-
dom: God does not need to be limited by a covenant, because God is good.
   By establishing a cause-and-effect relation between God’s and human action,
the Zadokite covenantal theology had made events predictable and veriﬁable. By
stressing God’s freedom and appealing to experience, Sapiential Judaism denies
the very idea of covenant: there is no predictable and veriﬁable link between
God’s and human actions. Faithful subjects do not complain against oppression
and injustice, when the king is in charge (Eccl. 5.8–9). No one can question the
king’s will, ‘for he does whatever he pleases’ (Eccl. 8.3). As a kingdom, so the
universe. People know that God is in charge and that there is a law and ‘a season
and a time for every matter under heaven’ (Eccl. 3.1–9). The divine order,
however, is far beyond human comprehension: God ‘has put the sense of [divine]
order into [human] minds, yet they cannot ﬁnd out what God has done from the
beginning to the end’ (Eccl. 3.11). God seeks the good of the cosmos regardless
of the interests of individuals. Human happiness is not to be found in active
partnership but in total submission to the rhythms of God: ‘In the day of pros-

  12. B. Vawter, Job and Jonah: Questioning the Hidden God (New York: Paulist Press, 1983).
                            BOCCACCINI Inner-Jewish Debate                                         15

perity be joyful, and in the day of adversity consider: God has made the one as
well as the other’ (Eccl. 7.14).

         2. The Next Generation (Sadducees, Pharisees and Essenes)
In describing the diversity of Jewish thought in the aftermath of the Maccabean
revolt, Flavius Josephus states:
      At that time there were three schools of thought among the Jews, which held different
      opinions concerning human events, the ﬁrst being that of the Pharisees, the second that
      of the Sadducees, and the third that of the Essenes. As for the Pharisees, they say that
      certain events are the work of Fate, but not all; as to other events, it depends upon
      ourselves whether they shall take place or not. The sect of the Essenes, however,
      declares that Fate is mistress of all things, and that nothing befalls men unless it be in
      accordance with her decree. But the Sadducees do away with Fate, holding that there is
      no such thing and that human actions are not achieved in accordance with her decree,
      but that all things lie within our own power, so that we ourselves are responsible for
      our well-being, while we suffer misfortune through our own thoughtlessness. (Ant.
      13.171–73)

We know (and Josephus also knew) that the situation in Second Temple Judaism
was further complicated by the presence of other groups and sub-groups, yet it is
important to see how the major ancient historian of Jewish thought took exactly
the problem of the relationship between human and divine agency as the crite-
rion for identifying the Jewish ‘schools of thought’ of his time, more than any
halakhic controversy. The emphasis on theological and philosophical issues is
not (only) a modern obsession of Christian scholars.13
   Sociologically, the threefold distinction into Sadducees, Pharisees and Essenes
seems to correspond to the stratiﬁcation of Jewish classes,14 with the Sadducees
representing the interests of the ruling class (the chief priests, large landowners,
notable elders and major ofﬁcials), the Essenes that of the lower class of artisans
and peasant, and the Pharisees that of the rapidly growing middle class of retain-
ers. The goodness of the universe, the effectiveness of human action, and the
expectations of God’s miraculous intervention depend largely on whether one
sees things from the top or the bottom of the social pyramid.

a. Priestly Circles and Hellenistic Judaism
Among those Jews (the Sadducees) who ‘do away with Fate’ we should include
the most direct heirs of Zadokite Judaism, but also the heirs of Sapiential
Judaism. Already at the end of the 3rd century BCE, we see the ﬁrst signs of
rapprochement between the two traditions in connection with the political alli-
ance of the Oniads with the powerful family of the Tobiads.15 The book of Tobit

   13. Pace L. H. Schiffman, Reclaiming the Dead Sea Scrolls: The History of Judaism, the Back-
ground of Christianity, the Lost Library of Qumran (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1994).
   14. A. J. Saldarini, Pharisees, Scribes and Sadducees in Palestinian Society (Wilmington, DE:
Michael Glazier, 1988).
   15. Boccaccini, Roots of Rabbinic Judaism, pp. 113–50; see also J. J. Collins, Jewish Wisdom in
the Hellenistic Age (Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1997).
16                       Divine and Human Agency in Paul

provides the ﬁrst living example of a righteous person who lived at the same time
‘according to the ordinance decreed in the law of Moses and according to the
instruction of Deborah, the mother of my father Tobiel’ (Tob. 1.8). This blending
of the two sets of traditions, the priestly and the familial, opened the path to a
harmonious (and no longer competitive) understanding of the relationship
between Wisdom and Torah.
   In the priestly circles of Jerusalem, Sirach (and later Baruch) came up with
what proved to be an ingenious solution. According to Sirach 24, Wisdom is a
heavenly being created by God before time and used by the creator as a tool to
turn chaos into order. Then Wisdom asked God for a dwelling place on earth.
This dwelling place is Israel, more speciﬁcally the temple. There, Wisdom mani-
fested herself in an embodied form, namely, ‘the book of the covenant of the
Most High God, the law that Moses commanded us as an inheritance for the
congregation of Jacob’ (Sir. 24. 23, cf. Bar. 4.1).
   The goal of Sirach and Baruch is to strengthen the centrality of the covenant
by connecting Wisdom to the Torah, that is, the cosmic order to the revealed
order, and to restore the balance between divine and human agency shaken by
the objections of Enochic and Sapiential Judaism. Sinners are inexcusable:
     Say not: It was the Lord’s fault if I sinned… In the beginning He created man and
     made him subject to his own will … Before man are life and death, whichever one he
     chooses shall be given to him… No man does [the Lord] command to be impious, to
     none does He allow to sin (Sir. 15.11–20).

The Enochic hypothesis of a superhuman origin of evil is denounced as a false
alibi: ‘When an impious man curses the satan, he really curses his own soul’ (Sir.
21.27). In contrast with human freedom, God’s freedom is self-constrained:
‘Mercy and wrath are with [the Lord], mighty when He forgives and when He
alights with wrath. Great as His mercy is His justice; He will judge men, each
according to his deeds’ (Sir. 16.11–12). For Sirach, the answer to the doubts of
Sapiential Judaism comes before the question: if the Law is the earthly embodi-
ment of Wisdom, there can be no contradiction between covenant and experi-
ence. The task of the wise is not to raise doubts but to ﬁnd an explanation to any
inconsistency that people can ﬁnd.
    In the texts of Hellenistic Judaism, it is rather the Torah that is to be subor-
dinated to Wisdom, which remains an uncreated emanation of God. As the
paideia of sophia, the Mosaic Torah has the philosophical and educational value
to teach Wisdom. Hence, the law is not important in itself but for what it means,
its true meaning being provided by the allegorical interpretation. ‘You must not
fall into the degrading idea that it was out of regard to mice and weasels and
other things that Moses drew up his laws with such exceeding care. All these
ordinances were made for the sake of righteousness to aid the quest for virtue and
the perfecting of character’ (Ep. Ar. 144). Through obedience to the Torah people
are educated to live in harmony with the order of the universe. ‘The world is in
harmony with the law, and the law with the world, and that man who observes
the law is constituted thereby a loyal citizen of the world, regulating his doings
                          BOCCACCINI Inner-Jewish Debate                                      17

by the purpose and will of Nature, in accordance with which the entire world
itself also is administered’ (Philo, Opif. 3).
   People are free and on their action and commitment depends exclusively their
welfare on earth. The Torah is God’s good and necessary paideia. Yet, in Helle-
nistic Judaism the emphasis remains more on God’s freedom. Against Sirach’s
statement of a balance between God’s mercy and God’s wrath, the Letter of
Aristeas claims that ‘God governs the whole cosmos with mercy and without any
wrath’ (Ep. Ar. 154). But the ‘theology of grace’ of Hellenistic Judaism is only
an emphasis on God’s absolute power; it is not an alternative to covenantal
nomism.16 Wisdom is no longer ﬁghting to replace the Torah, as in Sapiential
Judaism, but only competing for primacy in peaceful coexistence.

b. The Development of a Proto-Rabbinic Tradition
In order to understand what Josephus meant when he claimed that there were
people (the Pharisees) who ‘say that certain events are the work of Fate, but not
all’, we have to look back at the book of Daniel. Written in its ﬁnal form during
the Maccabean revolt, Daniel is a paradoxical document. It is an apocalyptic
text, composed in a language and style that had to remind its readers very much
of the Enochic texts. Yet, unlike the tradition of Enoch the book seeks to include
apocalyptic and eschatological traditions within a covenantal theology.17 Because
of the transgression of the covenant (Daniel 9), Israel now lives in a preordained
historical framework of degeneration. However, people preserve their freedom
and evil is denied any autonomy. The ‘four kingdoms’ and their angelic counter-
parts are not stray bullets but instruments of God’s punishments. At the end of
times, the kingdom of Israel will be restored (Daniel 7) and the suffering right-
eous will ﬁnd their ultimate reward through the resurrection of the dead (Daniel
12).
   Daniel’s principles ﬁnd a ﬁrst echo in 2 Maccabees. The ideas of resur-
rection and afterlife retribution make sense even of the martyrdom of the right-
eous. The seven brothers and their mother heroically face torture and death,
trusting that ‘the king of the universe will raise us up to an everlasting renewal
of life, because we have died for His laws’ (2 Macc. 7.9, cf. 7.23), while ‘for
[the evil king Antiochus] there will be no resurrection to life!’ (2 Macc. 7.14).
Compared to Daniel, there is a major development. For Daniel, the covenant
has been broken on the collective level and the punishment of Israel will end
only with the end of times, while for 2 Maccabees the covenant between God
and Israel is still valid: the crisis is only temporary:
     Punishments are designed not to destroy but to discipline our people. In fact, it is a
     sign of great kindness not to let the impious alone for long, but to punish them
     immediately … [God] never withdraws His mercy from us. Although He disciplines us
     with calamities, He does not forsake His own people. (2 Macc 6.12–17)



  16. Boccaccini, Middle Judaism, pp. 161–85.
  17. Boccaccini, Roots of Rabbinic Judaism, pp. 151–201.
18                      Divine and Human Agency in Paul

The suffering of the righteous does not seem any longer so unbearable and con-
tradictory to the promises of the covenant, even when things look truly desperate.
   Likewise, in denouncing the sinfulness of Israel, the Psalms of Solomon also
claim that everything is under God’s control. This is the case in heaven (‘[God]
has established in their courses the lights of heaven…they have erred not since
the day [God] created them. Since the generations of old they have not with-
drawn from their path, unless God commanded them (so to do) by the command
of His servants’: Pss. Sol. 18.12–14), as well as on earth (where ‘man and his
portion (lie) before You in the balance: he cannot add to, so as to enlarge, what
has been prescribed by You’: Pss. Sol. 5.4). God’s order encompasses and fore-
sees the exercise of human freedom on which God’s judgment is based: ‘Our
works are subject to our own choice and power. To do right or wrong (is) the
works of our hands’ (Pss. Sol. 9.4). Once again, everything is built around the
distinction between individual and corporate salvation. The stability of the cov-
enant is guaranteed by divine grace. ‘You chose the seed of Abraham before all
nations… and you will not reject us for ever’ (Pss. Sol. 9.9). And at the end of
times divine grace will prevail over evil. ‘The sinners’ inheritance is Sheol and
darkness and destruction, but the pious of the Lord shall inherit life in gladness’
(Pss. Sol. 14.9–10; cf. 15.1). This does not spare people, in this world, the experi-
ence of suffering and death, either as a punishment, a test or an act of discipline,
so much so that the psalmist proclaims: ‘Happy is the man whom the Lord re-
membered with reproving’ (Pss. Sol. 10.1).
   The introduction of the concepts of resurrection and afterlife retribution
makes clear in the proto-rabbinic traditions the distinction between collective and
individual retribution and provides a much stronger and more dynamic variant of
the covenantal Zadokite system. Historical determinism and individual freedom
may now coexist harmoniously. It is what Josephus meant: human events (prag-
mata) are ‘the work of Fate’, while individual destiny is entirely in the hands of
humans according to the rules of the covenant. God’s individual judgment is
ingeniously removed from the scrutiny of human experience and the prospect of
salvation is provided to individuals in the world to come even when they have to
suffer in this world as part of a guilty collectivity.

c. Enochic, Essene and Christian Traditions
In the aftermath of the Maccabean revolt the Enochic movement as a movement
of dissent by a few priestly families turned into something broader: a variegated
proliferation of social groups, including the urban Essenes (described by Philo,
Josephus and later Hippolytus), the Qumran Essenes (described by Pliny, Dio
and later Solinus), and the followers of Jesus. They all shared the idea of the
superhuman nature of evil.18
   Within all these movement we have a clear tendency toward determinism.
Humans are impotent and innocent victims of heavenly forces that are far more
powerful. Divine grace is the only power that can spare humans from such an evil.

  18. G. Boccaccini, Beyond the Essene Hypothesis: The Parting of the Ways between Qumran
and Enochic Judaism (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1998).
                           BOCCACCINI Inner-Jewish Debate                                    19

    Already in the Book of Dream Visions, we see a strong emphasis on historical
determinism. In spite of the rebellion of the fallen angels, the world is not totally
out of God’s control: the burden of evil is mitigated by the consciousness that
evil will not rule forever: at the end, in a time already decided by God, evil will
be defeated and goodness restored (1 En. 90.28–33). In the metaphorical world of
the Animal Apocalypse (1 En. 85.1–90.42), evil is described as a sort of genetic
disease that changes and weakens the nature of humankind, producing inferior
species of animals. No reference whatsoever is made to the covenant and the gift
of the Mosaic Torah (cf. 1 En. 89.29–33). Even the Jews, though the noblest part
of humankind, are equally subjected to the corruption of evil: from ‘bulls’ they
have become ‘sheep’.
    Within the framework of Enochic theology, the only way to restore the Jewish
people’s prerogatives was to make the election of Israel also part of the predes-
tined order. According to Jubilees, since creation God selected the Jews as the
chosen people and separated them from the other nations (Jub. 2.21). Jubilees can
thus reintroduce the concept of covenant within the Enochic theology (exactly
the other way around from what Daniel had done with Enochic principles). The
Jews are kept safe from the contamination of evil, as long as they keep the purity
boundary that separates them from the other nations, and abstain from the moral
impurity of murder (Jub. 7.33 et passim), idolatry (1.9 et passim) and especially
sexual immorality (33.20 et passim).
    The path to individual predestination was open. It was enough to state that
God created the angel and the children of darkness on the one hand and the angel
and the children of light on the other hand, and commanded the former to sin and
the latter to be righteous. It was what the Qumran sectarians believed, according
to their own writings19 and according to the testimony of Solinus: the members
of the community claimed to ‘have been destined for this way of life by divine
providence’ (Collectanea Rerum Memorabilium 34.9–12).20
    As far as we know the Qumran Essenes were the only group in Second Temple
Judaism who tried to solve the tension between human and divine agency by
dramatically downplaying the relevance of one of the terms of the debate.
Celebrated today for the discovery of their outstanding library, in its own time
the Qumran community was most likely little more than a marginal splinter
group of radical Essenes.21


   19. E. H. Merrill, Qumran and Predestination: A Theological Study of the Thanksgiving Hymns
(STDJ, 8; Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1975).
   20. M. Stern, Greek and Latin Authors on Jews and Judaism, vol. 2 (Jerusalem: Israel Academy
of Sciences and Humanities, 1981), pp. 416–22.
   21. As Philip S. Alexander pointed out in his contribution to the symposium: ‘there is,
apparently, little room here for independent human agency…divine agency is all’. On Qumran as a
marginal splinter group of Essenes, see F. Garcia Martinez and J. Trebolle Barrera, The People of
the Dead Sea Scrolls (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1995); P. R. Davies, Behind the Essenes: History and
Ideology in the Dead Sea Scrolls (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1987), G. Boccaccini, ‘Qumran: the
Headquarters of the Essenes or a Marginal Splinter Group’, in G. Boccaccini (ed.), Enoch and
Qumran Origins (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2005), pp. 303–309.
20                      Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   The answer of Qumran was not the only possible answer to the questions raised
by the earlier Enochic tradition. The tendency toward individual predeterminism
was rejected by Enochic Judaism. In the bulk of the Epistle of Enoch (which may
date from the early 1st century BCE) we read: ‘I have sworn unto you, sinners: In
the same manner that a mountain has never turned into a servant, nor shall a hill
(ever) become a maidservant of a woman; likewise, neither has sin been exported
into the world. It is people who have themselves invented it. And those who
commit it shall come under a great curse’ (1 En. 98.4). The author does not deny
that evil has a superhuman nature, but holds human beings responsible for the
sinful actions they commit. As Nickelsburg also has pointed out, over the centu-
ries the Enochic authors were persistent and consistent in making ‘human beings…
responsible for their actions… Nonetheless, the Enochic authors attributed a sig-
niﬁcant part of the evils in the world to a hidden demonic world’.22 In the
Enochic system of thought the two contradictory concepts of human respon-
sibility and human victimization had to coexist between the Scylla of an absolute
determinism and the Charybdis of an equally absolute antideterminism. Accept
either of these extremes and the entire Enochic system would collapse into the
condemnation of God as the unmerciful source of evil or as the unjust scourge of
innocent creatures.
   That this was also the position of the urban Essenes is conﬁrmed by Philo:
They claim that ‘the Deity is the cause of all good, but of no evil’ (Prob. 84).
Josephus himself – as we have seen – does not talk of individual predestination
but of historical determinism. Elsewhere he would add that ‘the Essenes like to
teach that in all things one should rely on God’ (Ant. 18,18), which is a fair
synthesis of Essene and Enochic (not Qumranic) theology.
   Apart from Qumran, the tension between human and divine agency remained
a characteristic of all groups who derived from the Enochic roots. In the Jewish
layers of the Testament of the Twelve Patriarchs, the duel between God and
Belial is a real conﬂict, not a pre-staged drama. The human soul is the battleﬁeld.
Belial placed ‘seven spirits of deceit’ in every human being ‘against humankind’
(T. Reub. 2.1–2) to ﬁght against the seven spirits of God. The outcome is not
preordained but depends on human responsibility. It is the ‘conscience of the
mind’ that ultimately makes the difference. ‘So understand, my children, that two
spirits await an opportunity with humanity, the spirit of truth and the spirit of
error. In between is the conscience of the mind which inclines as it will’ (T. Jud.
20.1–2). This allows the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs to develop an ethic
capable of opposing the power of evil. The goal is to obtain that ‘integrity’ of
soul that only can defeat the ‘duplicity’ of Belial (T. Benj. 6.7). People must ﬁll
their heart with an undivided love for God and the neighbour, thus leaving no
more room for desire and duplicity. ‘The Lord I loved with all my strength: and I
loved every human being, You do these as well, my children, and every spirit of
Belial will ﬂee from you…so long that you have the God of heaven with you,
and walk with all humankind in integrity of heart’ (T. Iss. 7.6–7, cf. 3.6–5.3,
T. Reub. 4.1; T. Benj. 3.4).

  22. G. W. E. Nickelsburg, ‘Enoch, First Book of’, ABD 2: 508–16 (514).
                          BOCCACCINI Inner-Jewish Debate                                    21

   Human beings are thus given some power in contrast to the power of Belial;
their responsibility is not denied as in Qumran. The ﬁnal defeat of evil, however,
cannot happen without divine intervention. At the end of the 1st century BCE,23
the Book of the Similitudes of Enoch claimed that evil will be eradicated by the
gracious intervention of the heavenly judge and messiah, the ‘Son of Man’.24
   When read in the broader context of Second Temple Judaism, the Jesus
movement (including Paul) looks at its inception to be little more than a variant
of the Enochic system. Although victims of a heavenly enemy, humans are
accountable: on the day of judgment, God ‘will repay according to each one’s
deeds’ (Mt. 26.27; Rom. 2.8). Recognizing the human need for salvation and
deliverance from evil, the Jesus movements understood the coming of the
Messiah Jesus as the manifestation ‘on earth’ of the ‘Son of Man’ (the Pauline
kyrios) for the forgiveness of sins (Mk 2.10; Rom. 3.21–26).
   What is very much disputed in early Christian texts seems to be the degree of
human freedom – once again a typical ‘Enochic’ problem. The Synoptics’ pres-
entation of Jesus as ‘the sinners’ doctor’ suggests that there are indeed people
who are ‘righteous’: ‘Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those
who are sick: I have come to call not the righteous but sinners’ (Mk 2.17 and
parallels). Many parables, like that of the lost sheep or of the prodigal son, also
imply that the Messiah came to bring salvation only for those (either few or
many) who went astray.
   Paul is the one who comes closer to individual predeterminism when he
claims that ‘all, both Jews and Greeks, are under the power of sin’ (Rom. 3.9),
and as a result ‘no human being will be justiﬁed by deeds prescribed by the law’
(Rom. 3.20), but only by a gracious act of ‘justiﬁcation by God’s grace as gift,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God put forward as a
sacriﬁce of atonement by his blood’ (Rom. 3.24–25). Yet Paul’s metaphor of
slavery, while conﬁrming the impossibility of doing good deeds, also implies
the freedom of the will, through which the slave accepts (or refuses) the offer of
redemption. God ‘is not unjust to inﬂict wrath on us’ (Rom. 3.5), but God’s
mercy intervenes to counterbalance the power of evil that, through the sin of
Adam, has made all humankind ‘slaves of sin’ (Rom. 6.20).
   At the roots of the powerful and reassuring message of fulﬁlment of Chris-
tianity is the very same delicate tension between human and divine agency that
was characteristic of the Enochic movements, of which the followers of Jesus
inherited certainties and uncertainties.25


             3. The Survivors (Christianity and Rabbinic Judaism)
The failure of the Jewish revolt and the destruction of the temple were a turning
point in the history of Judaism. By losing the temple, Judaism lost its common

   23. P. Sacchi, ‘Qumran e la datazione del Libro delle Parabole di Enoc’, Henoch 25.2 (2003),
pp. 149–66.
   24. S. Chialà, Libro delle Parabole di Enoc (Brescia: Paideia, 1997).
   25. Boccaccini, Middle Judaism, pp. 213–28.
22                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

ground, not because the temple provided a normative theology, but because
it was literally the only common place where Sadducees, Essenes, Pharisees,
Hellenistic Jews and followers of Jesus could meet and worship together the God
of Israel in spite of their major theological differences. When the temple was
gone, Jesus’ followers and Pharisees were unable to forge a shared identity. The
idea that the clash was between the new Christian faith and traditional Judaism
belongs to the foundational myths of Christianity and rabbinic Judaism. Jesus
and his followers were not as innovative as they claimed, nor the rabbis as con-
servative as they claimed. Neither movement parted from its roots in Judaism,
both parted from each other. After the destruction of the temple, it was only a
matter of time.26

a. From Enochic Judaism to Early Christianity
Documents like the Apocalypse of Abraham and 4 Ezra show how the traditions
that originated from Enoch had come to a dead end. The tension between human
and divine agency had reached the limit of desperation. The Enochic attempt to
reconcile God’s freedom and human responsibility had failed.
   It is now clear that on that day in the garden of Eden Eve had to confront not
the ‘crafty animal’ of Genesis (3.1) but the devil, Azazel, in person (Apoc. Abr.
23.1–11; cf. Rev. 12.9). Abraham asks God some tough questions: ‘Why have
you given Azazel such power that through his works he may lead the entire
humankind to ruin?’ (Apoc. Abr. 23.12), and even more: ‘Why have you let evil
to be desired in the human heart?’ (Apoc. Abr. 23.14). To these questions there is
no answer except the promise that everything (including the destruction of the
temple) was preordained and at the end of times evil will be annihilated and the
righteous will rejoice (Apoc. Abr. 31.4–5). Abraham remains silent (Apoc. Abr.
23.6).
   Beyond the hope (more and more remote) of redemption, there remains only
the idea of the power of evil and of the cruelty of God’s behaviour. God is just
and judges people according to their deeds, but the evil heart, the cor malignum
that people have inherited from Adam’s sin, makes the goal of salvation virtually
unattainable.
      Adam, clothing himself with the evil heart, transgressed and was overcome; and
      likewise also all who were born of him. Thus the inﬁrmity became inveterate, the Law
      indeed was in the heart of the people, but (in conjunction) with the evil germ; so what
      was good departed, and the evil remained. (4 Ezra 3.21–22)

In the silence of God only the cry of the innocent can be heard:
      Better had it been that the earth had not produced Adam, or else, having once pro-
      duced him, (for you) to have restrained him from sinning. For how does it proﬁt us all

   26. The ‘parting of the ways’ was between Christianity and rabbinic Judaism; see J. D. G. Dunn,
The Partings of the Ways Between Christianity and Judaism and Their Signiﬁcance for the Character
of Christianity (London: SCM Press, 1991); idem (ed.), Jews and Christians: The Partings of the
Ways, AD 70 to 135 (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1992). The ways between Christianity and Judaism
never parted; see A. H. Becker and A. Y. Reed (eds.), The Ways that Never Parted (TSAJ, 95; Mohr
Siebeck, 2003).
                           BOCCACCINI Inner-Jewish Debate                                         23

      that in the present we must live in grief and after death look for punishment? O Adam,
      what have you done! For though it was you who sinned, the fall was not yours alone,
      but ours also who are your descendants! For how does it proﬁt us that the eternal age
      is promised to us, whereas we have done the works that bring death? (4 Ezra 3.116–
      119)

God remains unmoved.
      This is the condition of the contest which (every) man who is born upon earth must
      wage; that, if he be overcome, he shall suffer as you have said; but if he be victorious,
      he shall receive what I have said… Moses, while he was alive, spoke unto the
      people… Therefore shall there not be such grief at their perdition. (4 Ezra 7.127–131)

It is all but a reassuring message. The evil heart makes God’s justice cruel, a
merciless verdict of guilt toward the majority of people. The elect Ezra feels the
solitude of his condition:
      O Lord, I said even then and say now: Blessed are they who come (into the world) and
      keep your commandments. But…who is there of those who have come (into the world)
      that has not sinned? Or who of the earth-born is there that has not transgressed your
      covenant? And now I see that the coming age shall bring delight to few, but torment to
      many. For the evil heart has grown up in us, which has estranged us from God and
      brought us into destruction. (4 Ezra 7.45–48)

The Jewish Enochic tradition died along with its hopes of eschatological redemp-
tion, overwhelmed by its inability to offer a sensible way out. In the words of
Jacob Neusner: ‘The response of the visionaries is…essentially negative. All
they had to say is that God is just and Israel has sinned, but, in the end of time,
there will be redemption. What to do in the meantime? Merely wait. Not much of
an answer.’27
   The author of 4 Ezra is a Paul without Christ. He shares the same desperation
for the sinful condition of humankind and the same hope of eschatological
redemption, without the possibility of individual rejoicing that for Paul the
coming of the redeemer Christ has already provided to the sinners who accept his
lordship. For those Jews who believed in the Enochic principles (and increas-
ingly for a large number of Gentiles who were seeking salvation from this evil
world) the Christian answer provided a much more reassuring way out of des-
peration: ‘Wretched man that I am! Who will rescue me from this body of death?
Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord!’ (Rom. 7.24–25). Once the
presence of the third party of the devil is established, the balance between human
and divine agency can be restored only by a gracious counter-act of mercy that
would give the righteous the possibility of being spared the evil of this world.
This gracious act of redemption and forgiveness of sin is the coming of the
Messiah Jesus, the earthly manifestation of the divine pre-existent Wisdom, the
eternal foundation of God’s new covenant: ‘Very truly, I tell you; before Abra-
ham was, I am’ (Jn 8.58). On these solid Jewish premises, Jesus’ followers would
build their revolution and their enduring fortunes.

  27. J. Neusner, ‘Judaism in a Time of Crisis: Four Responses to the Destruction of the Second
Temple’, Judaism 21 (1972), pp. 314–27 (317).
24                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

b. From Pharisaism to Rabbinic Judaism
For those Jews instead, who were the majority, who were troubled by the power
of sin in this world but had never shared the Enochic idea of a superhuman nature
of evil, the proto-rabbinic traditions of Pseudo-Philo and 2 Baruch offered an
equally effective way out of desperation. The historical failures of Israel would
only conﬁrm their belief in their idea of covenant and the centrality of the
Torah.28
   The Enochic visionaries, who claim that God and humans are impotent before
the triumph of evil, are reminded of the everlasting covenant:
      Remember that formerly Moses assuredly called heaven and earth to witness against
      you and said: If you transgress the Law you shall be dispersed, but if you keep it you
      shall be kept… And now Moses used to tell you before it befell you, and lo! They have
      befallen you: for you have forsaken the Law. (2 Bar. 84.2–5)

And to Jesus’ followers who talk of a new covenant, the sages insist that ‘the
owner’ may ‘come and destroy the [wicked] tenants’, but (heaven forbid!) will
never ‘give the vineyard to others’ (cf. Lk 29.16): ‘If you do not have pity on
your vineyard, O Lord, all you have done will be in vain, and you will not have
anyone who gloriﬁes your name. For if you planted another vineyard, it could not
trust you, as you destroyed the previous one’ (LAB 12.9–10).
   Facing the catastrophe, the righteous must rather react by multiplying their
efforts to obey the Torah: ‘If you endure and persevere in his fear and do not
forget his law, the times shall change over you for good and you shall see the
consolation of Zion’ (2 Bar. 44.7). Against the contemporaneous 4 Ezra,29
2 Baruch denies that the sin of Adam has weakened the freedom of human will:
      Justly do they perish who have not loved your Law, and the torment of judgment shall
      await those who have not submitted themselves to your power. For though Adam ﬁrst
      sinned and brought ultimately death upon all, yet of those who were born from him
      each one of them has prepared for his own soul torment to come, and again each one
      of them has chosen for himself glories to come… Adam is therefore not the cause,
      save only of his own soul, but each of us has been the Adam of his own soul. (2 Bar.
      54.14–19)

At the end, the sinners ‘shall be in the ﬁre’ (2 Bar. 44.15) and the righteous ‘shall
be made like unto the angels’ (51.10). As collective punishment is part of the
rules of the games and does not prevent the individual from reaching salvation,
even in the suffering of this world the righteous may ﬁnd reasons to rejoice:
‘Rejoice you in the suffering which you now suffer!’ (2 Bar. 52.6). 2 Baruch
admits that without the hope of afterlife retribution, life would not make sense
and the very idea of covenant would collapse in despair: ‘If there were this life
only…nothing could be more bitter than this’ (2 Bar. 21.13).


  28. G. Boccaccini, ‘Esiste una letteratura farisaica del Secondo Tempio?’, Ricerche Storico-
Bibliche 11.2 (1999), pp. 23–41.
  29. T. W. Willett, Eschatology in the Theodicies of 2 Baruch and 4 Ezra (Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press,
1989).
                           BOCCACCINI Inner-Jewish Debate                                      25

   Once the third party of the devil is removed, and the idea of afterlife retri-
bution is introduced, the balance between human and divine agency is perfectly
restored. Paradoxically, the catastrophe had the function of recalling the right-
eous to their responsibilities and to remind them of the essence of their relation-
ship with God:
      In former times and in the generations of old our fathers had helpers, righteous men
      and holy prophets… But now the righteous have been gathered and the prophets have
      fallen asleep, and we also have gone forth from the land, and Zion has been taken from
      us, and we have nothing now save the Mighty One and His Law … One is the Law
      given by the One; one is this world and there is an end for all who are in it. (2 Bar.
      85.1–3,14)

The Torah is God’s gracious gift of salvation, the earthly manifestation of the
heavenly pre-existent Wisdom, the foundation of God’s everlasting covenant:
‘two thousand years before the world was created, [God] created the Torah…the
garden of Eden for the righteous and Gehenna for the wicked’ (Tg. Neof. Gen.
3.24).30 On these solid Jewish premises, the rabbis would build their revolution
and their enduring fortunes.


                                 4. We, the Descendants
It is time to put the pictures back in the old box. Paper and dust have become
ﬂesh-and-blood people, who lived, argued, suffered and died, unconsciously lay-
ing the foundation for what we are. From the troubled world of Second Temple
Judaism, two siblings survived and were both blessed with children and grand-
children and great-grandchildren and uncountable descendants. Like Jacob and
Esau,31 they struggled in their mother’s womb and through childhood and
adulthood viciously and remorselessly fought over the birthright. Each of them
claimed to be the only true heir of Israel, and called the other names and refused
to acknowledge any blood tie. And with quarrel came persecution and hatred and
the Holocaust.
    We, Jews and Christians, are the descendants of those two siblings. Our walks
of life are different and will remain such. So what? Are we not walking toward
the same goal? Our views of the tension between human and divine agency are
different. So what? None of us has betrayed the family. Both our positions have
been part of the family heritage for centuries, long before we were born. There
never was in the family a single, shared position. Both covenantal nomism and
salvation by grace were part of the inner-Jewish debate in Second Temple
Judaism, neither was normative.
    Our forefathers have argued and hated each other. So what? Are we not
responsible for our own destiny and personally accountable for our own deeds?

   30. G. Boccaccini, ‘The Preexistence of the Torah: A Commonplace in Second Temple Judaism,
or a Later Rabbinic Development?’, Henoch 17 (1995), pp. 329–50.
   31. A. F. Segal, Rebecca’s Children: Judaism and Christianity in the Roman World (Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press, 1986).
26                    Divine and Human Agency in Paul

After so many years of struggle and estrangement, the time has come, as for
Jacob and Esau, to meet again, reconcile, mourn our deceased parents and set out
again in peace and reconciliation, ﬁnally being what we have always been and
never were – just brothers.
                                            Chapter 3

                     PREDESTINATION AND FREE WILL IN THE
                      THEOLOGY OF THE DEAD SEA SCROLLS

                                     Philip S. Alexander


                                           Introduction
The so-called Sermon on the Two Spirits in the Qumran Community Rule (1QS
3.13–4.24) is the locus classicus for the study of what the Qumran Covenanters
believed about the nature of divine and human agency in the world, their rela-
tionship and interaction. This is one of the most remarkable theological texts to
survive from early Judaism, at least within the Hebrew/Aramaic tradition. I know
of no other theological work in either of these languages so systematic and so
propositional in its presentation till we come to the little cosmological treatise
known as the Sefer Yesirah, the earliest recensions of which probably go back to
the third or fourth century of the Common Era.1 There is, to be sure, a great deal
of theology written in Hebrew and Aramaic from the Second Temple and Talmu-
dic periods, but it tends to be either narrative (i.e. haggadic) or exegetical (i.e.
midrashic) in form; philosophical theology in anything like our sense of the term
is almost totally absent.2 Haggadah and midrash are conspicuous by their absence
from the Sermon on the Two Spirits, which contains not a single explicit biblical
quotation, though, as we shall see, there is a hint of a biblical ‘peg’ on which it
all hangs, and it presupposes a distinctive reading of Genesis 1–3. This lack of
haggadah and midrash at once marks it out as unusual and gives it peculiar
interest.
    It is logical to begin our discussion with this key text. I shall proceed as
follows. First, I shall expound the Sermon essentially in its own terms. It is a
self-contained unit with its own rubric, and, on a preliminary reading, its mean-


   1. See the excellent new edition by A. P. Hayman, Sefer Yesira: Edition, Translation and Text-
Critical Commentary (Tübingen: Mohr, 2004). The date of Sefer Yesirah is actually very difﬁcult to
establish, and proposals ranging from the ﬁrst to the ninth centuries have been advanced.
   2. Systematic, propositional exposition of a subject was not, of course, alien to the ‘Hebrew’
mentality. We ﬁnd it regularly in the Mishnah, but the subject matter there is legal (halakhic), not
theological. The question of the rabbinic mentality has been extensively discussed: see e.g. J. Neusner,
Judaism as Philosophy: The Method and Message of the Mishnah (London: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1999); M. Fisch, Rational Rabbis: Science and Talmudic Culture (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1997).
28                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

ing is clear. However, to try and gain some deeper insight into it, and to draw out
its distinctiveness, I shall compare it brieﬂy with a number of parallel traditions:
Iranian dualism, the Greek doctrine of the Two Ways (as found in the Didache
1.1–6.2), and the rabbinic doctrine of the Two Inclinations. The purpose of this
comparison will be fundamentally heuristic: it will be aimed primarily at under-
standing more precisely what the Qumran text may be saying, though, of course,
the possibility cannot be ruled out (and, in fact, should very much be ruled in)
that the Qumran doctrine of the Two Spirits is historically related in some way
to these other traditions. Having come to a preliminary understanding of the
Sermon in its own terms, I shall then branch out to examine its setting within
Qumran theology and practice as a whole. What function did the Sermon fulﬁll
in Qumran thought? How inﬂuential was it? How was it understood by the Dead
Sea Covenanters? What evidence is there from other Qumran scrolls of ideas
which conﬁrm or contradict it? This will involve discussion not only of ideas
and practice but of literary matters as well, such as the place and purpose of the
Sermon within the Community Rule, and its literary relationship to works such as
the Astrological Physiognomy, 4Q186.


               1. The Sermon on the Two Spirits (1QS 3.13–4.24)
a. Preliminary Reading
The Sermon opens with a preamble (1QS 3.13–15)3 which clearly sets out its
purpose and content. It is intended for the use of the Maskil, the spiritual head of
the Community, so that he can instruct all the Sons of Light (i.e. the members of
the Community) concerning ‘the natures of all the children of men (toledot kol
benei ’ish) with respect to all the kinds of spirit which they possess, their signs
(’otot) with respect to their deeds during their generations, and their visitation for
chastisement together with the times of their reward’.
   The body of the Sermon follows through this programme in a orderly, pro-
positional way. It begins with an afﬁrmation that God is the ﬁrst cause: every-
thing that has come or will come into being owes its existence to him. He

   3. Previous discussion of the Sermon is very extensive. See the commentaries of P. Wernberg-
Møller, The Manual of Discipline: Translated and Annotated with an Introduction (Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 1957); J. Licht, The Rule Scroll: A Scroll from the Wilderness of Judaea, 1QS, 1QSa, 1QSb,
Text, Introduction and Commentary (Jerusalem: Bialik Institute, 1965 [Hebrew]); A. R. C. Leaney,
The Rule of Qumran and its Meaning: Introduction, Translation and Commentary (London: SCM
Press, 1966); M. A. Knibb, The Qumran Community (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1987); J. H. Charlesworth (ed.), Rule of the Community and Related Documents (Princeton
Theological Seminary Dead Sea Scrolls Project 1; Tübingen: Mohr, 1994); C. Martone, La ‘Regola
della Communità’ (Torino: Silvio Zamorani, 1995). The best of these remains Licht. In addition see
the separate essays by A. Dupont-Sommer, ‘L’instruction sur les deux Esprits dans le Manuel
de Discipline’, Revue de l’Historire des Religions 142 (1952), pp. 5–35; H. Stegemann, ‘Zur
Textbestand und Grundgedanken von 1QS III,13–IV,26’, RevQ 13 (1988), pp. 95–131; J. Licht,
‘An Analysis of the Treatise on the Two Spirits in DSD’, Scripta Hierosolymitana IV: Aspects of
the Dead Sea Scrolls, pp. 88–100. For the Cave 4 fragments see P. S. Alexander and G. Vermes,
Serekh Ha-Yahad and Two Related Texts (DJD XXVI; Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998).
                      ALEXANDER Predestination and Free Will                                     29

sustains it (‘supplies all its needs’), and it obeys without deviation the laws
which he has imposed upon it. The universe is rational and purposeful: it is fol-
lowing God’s foreordained design (3.15–17). Implicit here, of course, is a classic
theistic, creatio ex nihilo reading of the story of creation in Genesis 1, though
signiﬁcantly no quotation is offered of that biblical text.4
   Man’s place in God’s grand design is to govern the world, an allusion, surely,
to Gen. 1.28, though, as elsewhere, the exact language of the Bible is pointedly
not taken up.5 As part also of that design God has appointed for man ‘two spirits
in which to walk, the Spirits of Truth (’emet) and Falsehood (‘awel)’. There are
only these two spirits in which a man can walk: they are not two out of three or
more. A man walks either in truth or in falsehood: no third, intermediate way is
possible. Every human action is founded upon them, and falls into one or other
of these categories (3.25–26; cf. 4.15–16). This is how, I would suggest, we
should understand the famously troublesome statement at 4.25, that God ‘has
appointed the two spirits bad be-bad’. Vermes translates,6 reasonably from a
linguistic point of view, ‘in equal measure’, but clearly this cannot mean that the
spirits are always equal in power, because it is obvious that our writer believes
that Falsehood predominates in the present age. Rather the point is that there are
only these two spirits, which divide the moral universe between them without
remainder.
   We have here, then, a dualism, but the dualism is, strikingly, expressed ﬁrst in
ethical terms as an opposition between Truth and Falsehood. Later on Truth and
Falsehood are seen as emerging from even more ultimate cosmic ﬁrst principles,
viz. Light and Darkness (4.19, ‘from a spring of light emanates the nature of
Truth, and from a well of darkness the nature of Falsehood’), and they are called
‘Spirits of Light and Darkness’ (3.25), but it is important to note that when the
dualism is ﬁrst mentioned it is put in ethical terms. There is good reason for this:
our author is concerned primarily with the moral universe of human action, and
not with the physical universe of cosmic elements and forces. He clearly sees
these two universes as parallel, the one mirroring the other (light = truth: dark-
ness = falsehood), but how exactly they are related he does not tell us.
   His precise choice of ethical terminology is also very striking. He does not
speak in vague terms of ‘good and evil’ (tob wa-ra‘, though compare the dam-
aged text at 4.26) but of ‘truth and falsehood’ (’emet we-‘awel). The intellectual
emphasis here is because he believes that human wrongdoing is born of igno-
rance or rejection of the truth, human right-doing from knowledge and accep-


   4. Cf. Philo, Opif., who also, though a Platonist, gives a creatio ex nihilo reading. This reading
is against the grain of the original which sees creation as the imposing of order on pre-existent,
presumably eternally existing chaotic matter.
   5. 1QS 3.17–18 uses the more judicious verbal root mshl (le-memshelet tebel), the Bible the
more violent roots kbsh, rdh (kibshuha urdu). Qumran pictures Adam as a philosopher-king,
Genesis as a conqueror.
   6. G. Vermes, The Complete Dead Sea Scrolls in English (London: Penguin Books, 2004). I
use Vermes’s translation, with minor modiﬁcations, throughout, because it catches well the passion
and power of the Hebrew.
30                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

tance of the truth. People cannot be righteous without a knowledge of the truth.
This becomes evident when he describes how men can be saved: it is only
through having their spirits purged of falsehood and ignorance by the power of
truth:
      God will purify every deed of man with His Truth; He will reﬁne for Himself the
      human frame by rooting out all Spirit of Falsehood from the bounds of his ﬂesh. He
      will cleanse him of all wicked deeds with a spirit of holiness; like purifying waters He
      will shed upon him the Spirit of Truth (to cleanse him) of all abomination and
      falsehood. And he shall be plunged into the spirit of puriﬁcation, that he might instruct
      the upright in the knowledge of the Most High, and teach the wisdom of the sons of
      heaven to the perfect of the way. (4.20–22)

Implicit here, of course, is a whole practical scheme of salvation based on study
of Torah and the words of the Teacher of Righteousness, around which the
everyday life of the Community revolved.
    I do not think I am imagining things by again detecting here an implicit
reading of the story of creation in Genesis. There we are told that evil was
introduced into the world when the fruit of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good
and Evil was eaten. It is possible that for our author it was not so much the act
of disobedience that was the problem, as the knowledge man gained thereby of
the possibility of evil. That knowledge, once acquired, became the means by
which the forces of darkness (represented by the serpent) could manipulate him
and draw him into their camp. When our author says that the ultimate goal of
salvation is to attain ‘the glory of Adam’ (4.23), what he may mean is that those
who will ultimately be saved will return to the state of Adamic innocence that
existed before Adam ate of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil.7 All
memory, all knowledge of evil will be eradicated from men’s minds, because that
is the only basis on which they can be perfectly holy and righteous.
    The similarities between our author’s views and later Gnosticism are obvious,
and lend, I believe, support to those who have argued that Qumran theology is
proto-gnostic. The link between gnosis (da‘at) and salvation is fundamental in
the scrolls. It is no accident that when God is ﬁrst introduced in the Sermon
(3.15) it is as the ‘God of knowledge’. At the outset the preacher establishes one
of the key-notes of his sermon – knowledge. The saving God is the God of
knowledge, and it is through knowledge that he will accomplish salvation. That
knowledge was conveyed to humanity through the Teacher of Righteousness,
who can properly be seen as a type of gnostic redeemer. However, there is one
very fundamental theological difference from later Gnosticism. In the gnostic
systems evil arises through a stupendous cosmic accident. It is not part of God’s
overall plan. Indeed, God had no intention at all of creating the world. The
Eternal Father dwells untroubled in the pleroma, taking little or no interest in
what is happening in the demiurgic world of matter. In our Qumran text, how-
ever, by way of contrast, evil is most decidedly part of God’s plan, and he is

  7. For a wide-ranging discussion of the possible meanings of this term see C. H. T. Fletcher
Louis, The Glory of Adam: Liturgical Anthropology in the Dead Sea Scrolls (Leiden: E.J. Brill,
2002).
                      ALEXANDER Predestination and Free Will                                   31

deeply involved in the processes of history. Note one astonishing little detail. At
4.26 it says that God has allotted the Two Spirits to the sons of men ‘so that they
may know good [and evil]’, la-da‘at tob [wa-ra‘ ] – the restoration here is surely
certain. The allusion to the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil episode in
Genesis 2.15 and 3.1–7 is crystal clear, but the remarkable thing is that whereas
in the Bible it is God who tries to stop man obtaining this knowledge, and the
serpent who tricks him into receiving it, here it is God who ensures that man
acquires it: it is all part of his plan! This is a reading of Scripture against the
grain fully worthy of the later gnostics. It is God who has established the Spirits
both of Truth and Falsehood and ordained that men should walk in them. It is he
– and this is particularly relevant to our present purposes – who determines who
will be a Son of Truth and who a Son of Falsehood. The choice in which Spirit to
walk ultimately does not lie with man but with God (see esp. 4.22). There is
abundant evidence, as we shall see, that the Sermon was understood at Qumran
in a rigorously predestinarian fashion. Making God the ultimate, if not the
proximate cause of sin and evil is a tough theological stance to take, and our
author knows it. This is why, like so many others who have advocated such a
view, he takes refuge in God’s ‘mysterious understanding and glorious wisdom’
(4.18; cf. 3.23). How all this can be reconciled with morality, he implies, is
beyond the human intellect.
   The Spirits of Truth and Falsehood are not independent beings or entities, but
rather principles. It is true that they are called ‘spirits’ (ruhot), a term widely
used in early Jewish literature, and even as we shall see in a moment in the
Sermon itself, for angels or other beings of this kind. But we must remember the
philosophical poverty of the Hebrew language at this date (it did not develop a
truly philosophical vocabulary till the Middle Ages), and the difﬁculty it had in
expressing abstract concepts.8 When it talks here about the ‘Spirits of Truth and
Falsehood’ what I take it to mean are the principles of truth and falsehood. It
suits our author’s purpose, and makes his message all the more dramatic, to
personify mildly these principles. These principles are in conﬂict with each other.
Just as in the natural world light tries to overcome darkness, and darkness light,
so in the moral world Truth tries to overcome Falsehood, and Falsehood Truth:
‘Truth abhors the works of Falsehood, and Falsehood hates all the ways of
Truth’ (4.17). This struggle is fought out by proxies or agents. The principal
agent of Falsehood is referred to as the Angel of Darkness (4:21), the principal
agent of Truth as the Prince of Lights (3.20) and the Angel of Truth (3.24). Here,
I believe, we are indeed talking about spiritual beings, angels in the conventional
sense of the term. In keeping with his broad approach, our author refers to them
in an abstract way, but elsewhere in the scrolls they are given names: the Angel
of Falsehood is called Belial or Mastema, the Angel of Truth, Melchizedek or
Michael. These great angels are generals of vast armies, which are only ﬂeetingly
alluded to in our text. Spirits allotted to the Angel of Falsehood are explicitly


   8. It has been argued that he used the term ‘spirit’ because that was the term used in his Zoro-
astrian source. See further n. 13 below.
32                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

mentioned at 4.24 (I would argue that the reference is to demons),9 but we can be
sure that the Angel of Truth also has allotted spirits, the good angels.
   It is of the nature of the Angel of Falsehood and his minions that they attack
the Sons of Light, and attempt to lead them into error and sin. Indeed, it is only
because of these attacks that the Sons of Light fall into sin, and, but for the suc-
cour of God and his Angel of Truth, the enemy might well succeed (3.21–25).
God is not, therefore, the proximate cause of sin, though he remains its ultimate
cause, since the Angel of Falsehood acts according to his design. The exact nu-
ancing of the language here should be carefully noted. It does not say that the
forces of evil attack the ‘Sons of Men’, i.e. mankind in general, but ‘the Sons of
Light’, i.e. the elect portion of mankind. These are the only ones in whom our
author is really interested: the rest of humanity is already given over into the
hands of Belial, and is beyond hope of salvation. There is a note of realism here:
the elect are capable of sinning. Perfectionism is totally absent from Qumran
theology, at least as far as this world is concerned: the righteous only become
perfect at the eschaton. ‘Truth and falsehood struggle in the hearts of men and
they walk in both wisdom and folly’ (4.23–24). Whether a man is counted right-
eous or wicked depends on the preponderance of Truth and Falsehood in his
make-up: ‘according to a man’s share in Truth shall he be righteous and thus hate
falsehood, and according to his inheritance in the lot of Falsehood shall he be
wicked’ (4.24; cf. 4.15–16).
   Our preacher offers extensive lists of the virtues and vices which mark respec-
tively those who walk in the Spirit of Truth and those who walk in the Spirit of
Falsehood. These constitute the ‘fruits’ of these spirits, the signs (’otot) about
which he spoke in his preamble which identify whether a man is a Son of Light or
a Son of Darkness. These signs are, of course, highly important if one is to dis-
criminate for purposes of fellowship between those who should, and those who
should not belong to the Community, but they are also, perhaps, not quite dis-
criminating enough, a problem which may have been solved in other ways, as we
shall see. He also enumerates the recompense which God has decreed for each
category. For the righteous there are rewards both here and hereafter: ‘healing,
great peace in a long life, and fruitfulness, together with everlasting blessing and
eternal joy in life without end, a crown of glory and a garment of majesty in
unending light’ (4.6–8). For the wicked the punishments seem to belong only to
the hereafter: ‘a multitude of plagues by the hand of the destroying angels, ever-
lasting damnation by the avenging wrath and fury of God, eternal torment and
endless disgrace together with shameful extinction in the ﬁre of the dark regions.
The times of their generations shall be spent in sorrowful mourning and in bitter
miseries and in calamities of darkness until they are destroyed without remnant
or survivor’ (4.11–14). The language is terriﬁc, but it is also restrained and
studiedly unspeciﬁc. The hell awaiting the damned after death is clearly a dark
and ﬁery region, but no attempt is made to elaborate with lurid details in the way

  9. See my ‘Demonology of the Dead Sea Scrolls’, in P. W. Flint and J. C. VanderKam (eds),
The Dead Sea Scrolls after Fifty Years: A Comprehensive Assessment, vol. 2 (Leiden: E.J. Brill,
1999), pp. 331–53.
                      ALEXANDER Predestination and Free Will                                     33

that other early Jewish texts do.10 At ﬁrst glance, particularly in Vermes’s trans-
lation, which I have quoted, it seems that our author believed in eternal punish-
ment, but on closer reading I think it becomes clear that he was an annihilationist.
The references to the ‘extinction’ and ‘destruction’ of the damned are to my mind
decisive, and this position ﬁts more easily with his general belief in the ﬁnal, utter
eradication of the Spirit of Falsehood.
    A concluding point will serve to round off this preliminary reading of the
Sermon on the Two Spirits. It is that the conﬂict between the Spirits is not
eternal: it has a predetermined end (qes). Just as God in his mysterious wisdom
inaugurated this conﬂict, so it is he who will bring to an end. He will ensure that
Truth ﬁnally triumphs, and Falsehood is utterly destroyed. We commented earlier
on how Truth will purify and perfect the Sons of Light at the eschaton. The con-
ﬂict between Truth and Falsehood is a feature only of this age, when Falsehood
appears to have the upper hand. But this age has a ﬁxed term, and the age to
come will ﬁnally and inevitably dawn. Here too, as elsewhere in the Sermon, the
emphasis is on the divine act. There is little, apparently, that the Sons of Light
can do, other than walk in the Spirit of Truth, and seek to manifest the fruits of
that Spirit (see esp. 4.18–23).

b. Parallels
Iranian Dualism. The similarity between the doctrine of the Two Spirits in the
Qumran Community Rule and Iranian dualism struck scholars as soon as the
text was published. A consensus has emerged, though it is by no means unchal-
lenged, that in fact the Sermon on the Two Spirits has been inﬂuenced by Iranian
thought.11 This makes good sense. As I noted earlier the text stands out as most
unusual within early Jewish literature, and this could be explained by invoking

   10. These texts, admittedly, are much later. Hell generally remains only vaguely and impres-
sionistically described in Second Temple Judaism. See Martha Himmelfarb, Tours of Hell: An
Apocalyptic Form in Jewish Christian Literature (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985).
   11. K. G. Kuhn, ‘Die Sektenschrift und die iranische Religion’, ZTK 49 (1952), pp. 296–316;
H. Michaud, ‘Un mythe zervanite dans un des manuscrits de Qumrân’, VT 5 (1955), pp. 137–47;
J. Duchesne-Guillemin, ‘Le Zervanisme et les manuscrits de la Mer Morte’, Indo-Iranian Journal 1
(1957), pp. 96–99; P. Wernberg-Møller, ‘A Reconsideration of the two Spirits in the Rule of the
Community’, RevQ 3 (1961), pp. 413–41; S. Shaked, ‘Qumran and Iran: Further Considerations’,
Israel Oriental Studies 2 (1972), pp. 433–46; Marc Philonenko, ‘La doctrine qoumrânienne des
deux esprits: ses origines iraniennes et ses prolongements dans le judaïsme essénien et le christian-
isme antique’, in G. Widengren, Anders Hultgård and Marc Philonenko (eds), Apocalyptique
Iranienne et Dualisme Qoumrânien (Paris: Adrien Maisonneuve, 1995), pp. 163–211. The best
overviews of broader Iranian inﬂuence on Judaism in late antiquity are: D. Winston, ‘The Iranian
Component in the Bible, Apocrypha and Qumran: A Review of the Evidence’, History of Religions
5 (1966), pp. 183–216; A. Hultgård, ‘Das Judentum in der hellenistich-römischen Zeit und die
iranische Religion – ein religionsgeschichtliche Problem’, in ANRW II.19.1: 512–90; S. Shaked,
‘Iranian Inﬂuence on Judaism: First Century B.C.E. to Second Century C.E.’, in W. D. Davies and
L. Finkelstein (eds), The Cambridge History of Judaism, vol. 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1984), pp. 308–25; Mary Boyce and Frantz Grenet, A History of Zoroastrianism. III.
Zoroastrianism under Macedonian and Roman Rule (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1991), pp. 361–490 (esp.
pp. 422–25 on the Sermon on the Two Spirits). See also the article by J. Duchesne-Guillemin on
‘Dead Sea Scrolls’ in the Encyclopaedia Iranica 7 (1996), pp. 177–79.
34                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

foreign inﬂuence. It would by no means be the only case of Iranian inﬂuence on
late Second Temple period Judaism. Over the past ﬁfty years there has been a
powerful trend in scholarship, which Walter Burkert has dubbed ‘the orientaliz-
ing revolution’,12 to revalue the inﬂuence of Babylonian and Persian ideas on the
western Mediterranean in the late ﬁrst millennium BCE, including Greek Ionia.
Iranian dualism evolved and changed over time, and its history is notoriously
contentious and hard to reconstruct, but that it offers striking similarities to our
text is beyond reasonable doubt. Take the following passage from Yasna 30.3–4:
      The two primeval Spirits who are twins were revealed [to me, Zarathustra] in sleep.
      Their ways of thinking, speaking, and behaving are two: the good and the evil. And
      between these two [ways] the wise men have rightly chosen, and not the foolish ones.
      And when these two Spirits met, they established at the origin life and non-life and
      that at the end the worst existence will be for the followers of Falsehood and for the
      followers of Truth the best thinking. (trans. Gherardo Gnoli)

   Interestingly the Dead Sea doctrine seems to correspond most closely to the
earliest, gathic stage of Iranian dualism which envisages the twin good and evil
spirits (Spenta Mainyu and Anra Mainyu) as being ‘fathered’ by the supreme
being Ahura Mazda, and which looks forward to the ultimate triumph of good
over evil, the Frasho-kereti, the ‘Making Wonderful’, the glorious renewal of
the earth at the end of time.13 It does not correspond to the dualism of the later

   12. W. Burkert, The Orientalizing Revolution: Near Eastern Inﬂuence on Greek Culture in the
Early Archaic Age (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univeristy Press, 1992).
   13. I am very conscious of the fact that this statement runs counter to the opinion of Mary
Boyce, the greatest authority on Zoroastrianism in recent times. Quoting James Barr in support
(‘The Question of Religious Inﬂuence: the Case of Zoroastrianism, Judaism and Christianity’,
JAAR 53 [1985], p. 203 n.4), she argues that it is a modern western distortion of Zoroastrianism to
suggest that Ahura Mazda ‘created’ Anra Mainyu, which is contrary to ‘the magisterium of
traditional Zoroastrian belief and observance’. Her own summary of Zoroastrian belief at the
beginning of the Hellenistic age is worth quoting in full: ‘Zoroastrianism was regularly character-
ized by Greeks as the “Persian religion”, as if it were an ethnic faith like the others which they
encountered; but (however true this had become in part) it was in fact a credal religion, the oldest
known in history. A person was not born a Zoroastrian, nor did he enter the religious community
through a physical rite (such as the Jewish one of infant circumcision); but he became a Zoroastrian
on attaining maturity by choosing to profess the doctrines taught by Zoroaster. Among the
distinctive elements in these doctrines were: belief in God (Ahura Mazda), the one eternal being,
and in a likewise self-existing, wholly independent Spirit of evil (Anra Mainyu); belief that Ahura
Mazda created the world in order to destroy that Spirit; and that a struggle is being waged here and
now by celestial beings, just men and the whole good creation against him and his legions, who
have malignly invaded the world; that this struggle will end with the triumph of the good, which
will mark the last day of measurable time and human history, this glorious moment being known as
Frasho-kereti, the ‘Making wonderful’; belief that the bones of the dead will then be raised up, so
that all humanity, with those still living, can undergo a last judgement by ﬁery ordeal. The wicked
will be thereby destroyed as part of the cleansing of the cosmos from evil, and the earth, likewise
cleansed, will be once more wholly good, as Ahura Mazda had created it. Then his kingdom will
come upon it, in which the just, made immortal in the ﬂesh, will live in bliss for ever’ (Boyce and
Grenet, History of Zoroastrianism 3, pp. 363–4; see also her summary of Zoroaster’s own teaching
in her textbook, Zoroastrians: their Religious Beliefs and Practices [London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1979], pp. 17–29). However, I am not entirely convinced by her on this particular point, nor
                      ALEXANDER Predestination and Free Will                                   35

Pahlavi texts which simply opposes Ohrmazd to Ahriman as competing powers.
There seems, however, to be one very important difference. In the Zoroastrian
texts man appears to be totally free to choose between the spirits. This is evident
even from the brief Yasna 30 passage which I quoted earlier. In the Qumran text,
however, if my reading is correct (and I shall presently bring evidence that the
text was so read within the Dead Sea Community), man’s destiny is predeter-
mined by God. He does not have free choice. The possibility that even this reﬂects
the more deterministic, fatalistic form of Iranian dualism known as Zurvanism
cannot entirely be ruled out. However, I am more inclined to think that the
Qumran position arose naturally through the adaptation of gathic dualism to
Jewish monotheism.

The Two Ways. The second comparison is with the doctrine of the Two Ways in
Didache 1.1–6.2. This too has been compared at length with the Sermon on the
Two Spirits.14 The comparison can be made on a number of levels. The genre of
the Serekh ha-Yahad and the Didache is broadly the same: both are rules or
orders intended to regulate the belief and practice of a religious community. That
the Two Ways passage in the Didache was meant to function in the context of
Christian catechesis seems obvious, and this strengthens the argument that the
Sermon on the Two Spirits was used in a similar way at Qumran. The major
point of contact between the two texts is their catalogues of virtues and vices
which characterize respectively the behaviour of the righteous and the wicked.
Signiﬁcantly both texts use the term ‘way’ to designate the competing types of
conduct. It seems likely that the Didache text represents a Christian variant of
an originally independent, short Jewish ethical treatise going back to Second
Temple times, which may have been drawn upon, in some shape or form, by the
author of the Sermon on the Two Spirits. However, there are also enormous
differences between the two treatises. The Didache text totally lacks the heavy
theology of the Qumran Sermon. The Didache in speaking of the Way of Life
and the Way of Death does hint obliquely at the consequences of following these
two ways, and of ultimate punishment and reward, but even this it does not spell
out, whereas the Treatise on the Two Spirits does. Still less does the Didache
speculate on a cosmic struggle between Good and Evil, Truth and Falsehood. It
concentrates exclusively on listing good actions to follow and bad ones to avoid.
And, once again, the predestinarianism of the Qumran text is missing. The whole
exhortatory tone in the Didache makes no sense unless those exhorted have the
freedom to choose between the Way of Life and the Way of Death.


are others better qualiﬁed to decide the matter than I am. See, e.g., G. Gnoli, ‘Dualism’, Encyclo-
paedia Iranica 7 (1996), pp. 576–82 (with extensive bibliography). The matter is not of critical
importance to my present argument.
    14. The most comprehensive recent discussion of the Two Ways tradition is Huub van de Sandt
and David Flusser, The Didache: Its Jewish Sources and its Place in Early Judaism (CRINT;
Assen/Minneapolis: Royal Van Gorcum/Fortress Press, 2002), pp. 55–270, esp. pp. 140–54. J.-P.
Audet, ‘Afﬁnités littéraires et doctrinales du Manuel de Discipline’, RevB 59 (1952), pp. 219–38 is
still worth reading.
36                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

The Two Inclinations. My ﬁnal comparison is with the rabbinic doctrine of the
Two Inclinations, the Inclination towards Good (yeser ha-tob) and the Inclina-
tion towards Evil ( yeser ha-ra‘ ).15 This is one of the fundamental doctrines of
rabbinic theology, and the texts on it are rich and varied. However, the rabbis
tend to present it in a coherent and consistent fashion. The two inclinations exist
within the human heart and were put there by God (b. Qidd. 30b). The yeser ha-
ra‘ represents the tendencies of human nature and appetite in their untamed,
natural state. It is not in itself bad, and indeed such divinely sanctioned and man-
dated human activities as procreation would be impossible without it. It only
becomes evil when it is given free reign (Gen. Rab. 9.7). God in his wisdom
implanted the yeser ha-tob in the human heart precisely to check and counterbal-
ance the yeser ha-ra‘ (otherwise man would not have real choice, and so not be
truly free), and it can be strengthened by self-discipline and above all by the
study of the Torah (b. Qidd. 30b). There are hints that the doctrine may have its
roots in Second Temple Judaism,16 but in the form in which we have it it seems
to be a classically rabbinic construct.
   The rabbinic doctrine of the Two Inclinations offers some interesting parallels
to the Qumran doctrine of the Two Spirits: the avoidance of perfectionism in
both cases is noteworthy (‘good’ and ‘evil’ exist in everyone’s heart, even in the
hearts of the most holy – at least in this age17), and the rabbinic insistence that
Torah study has the power to subdue the human tendency towards evil would
have been heartily endorsed at Qumran. Both the rabbis and the Qumran theolo-
gians seemed to have agreed on the primacy of intellect over will. Knowing the
truth was a precondition to doing it, though both avoid the manifest fallacy of
claiming that knowing the truth automatically leads to doing it. Knowledge is a
necessary, but not a sufﬁcient condition. However, it is once again the differ-
ences that catch the eye. In classic rabbinic theology the yesarim are purely psy-
chological in nature: they exist only within the human heart. There is no hint that
they correspond to cosmic principles, or are bound up with a vast cosmic struggle
between good and evil. And, yet again, we ﬁnd the rabbis insisting on freedom
of choice. They do acknowledge that the more one gives into the evil inclination
the harder it becomes to resist it (b. Sukk. 52a–b), but in principle man has the


   15. See the useful survey by G. H. Cohen Stuart, The Struggle in Man Between Good and Evil:
An Inquiry into the Origin of the Rabbinic Concept of Yeser Hara‘ (Kampen: J.H. Kok, 1984).
Further: S. Schechter, Some Aspects of Rabbinic Theology (New York: Schocken Books, 1965);
S. S. Cohon, ‘Original Sin’, HUCA 21 (1948), pp. 275–330; G. F. Moore, Judaism in the First
Centuries of the Christian Era, vol. 1 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1927), pp. 479–
93; E. E. Urbach, The Sages: The Concepts and Beliefs (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1995), pp. 471–83.
   16. H. Lichtenberger, ‘Zu Vorkommen und Bedeutung von yetser in Jubiläenbuch’, JSJ 14
(1983), pp. 1–10.
   17. The rabbis believed that the evil inclination would be removed in the world to come, and as a
result in that world ‘there will be no eating or drinking, procreation or barter, envy or hate’ (b. Ber.
17a). Interestingly this will make humans like the angels, who have no evil inclination (Lev. Rab.
26.5) – a pointed snub, perhaps, to the myth of the fall of the angels?
                      ALEXANDER Predestination and Free Will                                  37

resources to control the evil inclination, and he is always personally culpable if
he succumbs to it. The rabbis did have a concept of divine foreknowledge but
they did not see it as negating human freedom. In the famous and deliberately
paradoxical statement in Pirqe ’Avot 3.16, ‘all is foreseen (safui), but freedom of
choice (reshut) is given; and the world is judged by grace (tub), yet all is accord-
ing to the preponderance of one’s deeds (rob ha-ma‘aseh)’. There may be an
historical link between the rabbinic doctrine of the Two Inclinations and the
Qumran Doctrine of the Two Spirits. The former can plausibly be read as a
conscious revision of the latter, or of a view broadly similar to it, a psycholo-
gizing interpretation precisely intended to avoid the cosmic dualism of the other
view, and to play up human responsibility.
    These comparisons, perfunctory though they have been, have served a useful
purpose. They have helped us to highlight certain distinctive features of the
Qumran doctrine, particularly its rigorous predestinarianism. They have brought
out the heavy theological character of the Sermon on the Two Spirits, which, as
I said earlier, is virtually unique within Jewish literature in Hebrew/Aramaic
literature in late antiquity, while at the same time showing that it has a context
within a vigorous and long-running Jewish debate on the relationship between
divine and human agency.

                      2. The Sermon in the Context of Qumran
                          Literature, Theology and Practice
a. Function within the Community Rule
Does the Sermon on the Two Spirits represent unusual doctrine at Qumran, or
was it fully integrated into Qumran theology? I shall show that the latter is most
emphatically the case. Though the level of its abstraction is unusual, as is its
prepositional mode of argument, the Sermon’s ideas are thoroughly at home in
the general worldview and praxis of the Qumran Community. There is every
reason to believe that far from being an isolated document, the Sermon was
deeply inﬂuential.
   First of all, let us consider the fact that it is found in the Community Rule.
What is the Community Rule, and what function did it play in the life and thought
of the Community? The Rule is a Serekh, or more correctly a collection of Sera-
khim, that is to say it is a text that is intended to determine the Community’s
belief and practice. Serakhim are not Torah: they do not come with the divine
sanction of revelation, and for that reason can be, and clearly were changed
(though only, of course, by competent authority), but they are nonetheless
binding on the Community so long as they are in force.18 The Serekh ha-Yahad
was not, I have argued, intended as a rule-book for the ordinary members, but
rather as a manual for the Maskil, the spiritual guide of the Community, to help

   18. On the nature of the Serakhim see my article, ‘Rules’, in: L. H. Schiffman and J. C Van-
derKam (eds), Encyclopaedia of the Dead Sea Scrolls (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), II,
pp. 799–803.
38                       Divine and Human Agency in Paul

him to perform his duties.19 This is why it is so incomplete. If I join a club as a
new member, I will expect the club’s rules to explain to me in reasonable detail
what I am supposed to do or not to do. Any new member of the Yahad would
have found the Serekh a pretty inadequate guide to belief and practice. This
Serekh was not, however, intended for new members, but rather for the spiritual
head of the Community, and for that reason it could take a lot for granted. When
it says that it is la-maskil, the lamed is not lamed-auctoris, but rather a dativus
commodi, ‘for the Maskil’, that is to say for his use. The inclusion of such a
theological text within the Maskil’s handbook suggests that that text had a cate-
chetical or instructional function. It contained fundamental doctrine which he
was expected to impart.
    The Serekh ha-Yahad was clearly inﬂuential within the Community. This is
shown by the number of versions of it that survive (eleven in all), spread palaeo-
graphically over around 120 years. The number of allusions to the Serekh ha-
Yahad in non-Serekh texts is also impressive, suggesting that it was fully inte-
grated into community life and treated as authoritative.20 There is only one other
manuscript of the Serekh, apart from 1QS, which contains a version of the
Sermon on the Two Spirits, and that is the papyrus manuscript from Cave 4
                 c
known as 4QS , which seems to have contained a version of S very close to that
                                                                           d
in 1QS. The Sermon on the Two Spirits was certainly missing from 4QS , which
clearly began at 1QS V, omitting all the material in 1QS I–IV, and we cannot be
                                                 b
sure that it was in the cognate recension 4QS . The other manuscripts of S are
simply too fragmentary for us to form an opinion one way or the other. The
recensional history of S is hotly contested and Sarianna Metso and others have
argued that 1QS, though palaeographically rather early represents recensionally
                                                           b           d
a very late form.21 The later Herodian manuscripts 4QS and 4QS are in fact
recensionally earlier. This opens the possibility that the Sermon on the Two
Spirits is actually a rather late addition to the Rule, which might somewhat
weaken my argument for the pervasiveness of its theology at Qumran. However,
I have argued that Metso’s reconstruction of the recensional history of the Rule
is questionable, since it ﬂies in the face of the palaeographical dating of the
manuscripts. This would not matter so much in the case of most types of text: in
most cases there is no necessary correlation between when a text was copied and
the date of the recension it contains. However, Serekh ha-Yahad is a special kind
of text: it is a rule-book, and so one assumes that when a scribe copied it he
copied the form of the rule-book currently in force within the community. In
                    b          d
other words 4QS and 4QS , which were copied in the Herodian period, present
                                                                                  c
the form of the rule-book current in the Herodian period, and 1QS and 4QS ,
which were copied some eighty years earlier, represent the form of the rule-book


  19. See my article, ‘The Redaction-History of Serekh ha-Yahad: A Proposal’, in F. García
Martinez and E. Puech (eds), Hommage à Jozef T. Milik = RevQ 17 (1996), pp. 437–56.
  20. Alexander and Vermes, Serekh Ha-Yahad, pp. 3–4.
  21. Sarianna Metso, The Textual Development of the Qumran Community Rule (Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 1997).
                      ALEXANDER Predestination and Free Will                                    39

current around 100 BCE.22 If my arguments are sound, then the Sermon on the
Two Spirits was almost certainly an integral part of the earliest known forms of
the Community Rule. Too much should not be made of the fact that it was miss-
ing, along with the liturgy for the renewal of the covenant, from one Herodian
             d
version, 4QS .

b. Echoes of the Doctrine of the Two Spirits in other Qumran texts
4Q502. Echoes of the Sermon on the Two Spirits can be found in various Qumran
texts. The ﬁrst of these which I will mention brieﬂy is 4Q502, brieﬂy because the
text is so fragmentary that little can be made of it. Maurice Baillet suggested it is
a ritual for a wedding: hence its common name 4QRitual of Marriage; Joseph
Baumgarten demurred and suggested it was a celebration possibly related to the
festival of Sukkot, in which old men and women play a part.23 Both proposals
involve a great deal of imagination. However one thing is certain: the text is not
a copy of the Serekh ha-Yahad, yet fragment 16 appears to contain a substantial
quotation from the Sermon on the Two Spirits (= 1QS 4.4–6). The fragment is
small and very damaged with only a few words surviving, but the lines can be
totally satisfactorily reconstructed by supplying the 1QS text. Why the Sermon
on the Two Spirits should have been quoted in such a work is entirely unclear,
but that it was quoted is beyond reasonable doubt. It suggests that it was well
known and regarded as authoritative. Interestingly the text is on papyrus and its
script indicates that it was written towards the beginning of the ﬁrst century BCE.
In other words palaeographically speaking it is roughly contemporary with 1QS
          c
and 4QS . This is further corroboration of the existence of the Sermon at this
early date.

4Q186. Echoes of the Sermon on the Two Spirits can also be found in the much
better preserved manuscript 4Q186. I have written on this text at length else-
where and will here simply summarize my views that are pertinent to the present
discussion.24 4Q186 is not, as John Allegro suggested and many have accepted, a


   22. Alexander, ‘The Redaction-History of Serekh ha-Yahad: A Proposal’, pp. 437–56.
   23. M. Baillet, DJD VII, pp. 105–136; J. M. Baumgarten, ‘4Q205, Marriage or Golden Age
Ritual?’, JJS 34 (1983), pp. 125–35; J. M. Baumgarten, ‘The Qumran-Essene Restraints on
Marriage’, in L. H. Schiffman (ed.), Archaeology and History in the Dead Sea Scrolls (Shefﬁeld:
Shefﬁeld Academic Press, 1990), pp. 13–24.
   24. See my article, ‘Physiognomy, Initiation and Rank in the Qumran Community’, in P. Schäfer,
H. Cancik and H. Lichtenberger (eds), Geschichte–Tradition–Reﬂexion: Festschrift für Martin
Hengel zum 70. Geburtstag, vol. 1 (Tübingen: Mohr, 1996), pp. 385–94. For further background to
4Q186 see Matthias Albani, ‘Horoscopes in the Qumran Scrolls’, in Flint and VanderKam, Dead
Sea Scrolls after Fifty Years, pp. 279–330; Kocku von Stuckrad, Das Ringen um die Astrologie:
Jüdische und christliche Beiträge zum antiken Zeitverständnis (Berlin/New York: W. de Gruyter,
2000), pp. 193–214. The cosmological determinism of Qumran thought may be reﬂected also in the
selendromium/ brontologion, 4Q318, by the choice of Taurus rather than Aries or Pisces as the ﬁrst
sign of the zodiac. The choice was probably determined by the fact that the vernal equinox occurred
in Taurus at the putative date of creation, but with the precession of the equinoxes it had moved to
Pisces and was about to enter Aries at the time 4Q318 was written (it is, of course, now about to
40                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

horoscope. It is fundamentally a physiognomy. It deduces the nature of a man’s
spirit from the physical form of certain indicative parts of his body. It further
suggests that the nature of the man’s spirit, and hence his destiny, is determined
by the conﬁguration of the heavens at the time of his birth – a fundamental claim
of natal astrology. This injects a strong note of fatalism into the texts. One’s
character and destiny are, apparently, pre-determined by cosmic forces beyond
one’s control. The conﬁguration of the heavens determines the nature of one’s
spirit which in turn determines one’s bodily form (conﬁguration of the heavens
ĺ spirit ĺ bodily form). The purpose of the text is to provide a means of deter-
mining a subject’s true nature (his spirit). Theoretically that could be worked out
either astrologically from his natal chart or from his physical form. The latter,
however, is the more practical approach because it simply involves direct
observation. Casting the natal chart with any accuracy requires a precise date and
time of birth, something which few commoners in antiquity would have known.
The three elements, the conﬁguration of the heavens, the spirit and the body are
closely interlinked, and theoretically speaking we could start from any one of
them and predict the others. So if we know the conﬁguration of the heavens at
any point in time we should be able to predict the sort of spirit someone born
then will have, and if we know his spirit we should be able to say something
about his physical form. Similarly if we know his spirit, we should be able to
predict the state of the heavens at his birth, and his physical form. Or if we know
his physical form we should be able to predict his spirit, and if we know his spirit
we should be able to work out at what time of the year he was born. The most
practical place to start, however, is obviously with the bodily form, and in par-
ticular those part of the body, the ﬁngers, the legs and so forth which are visible.
   What links this text to the Sermon on the Two Spirits is the fact that both
share the same dualistic worldview, which is expressed in rather similar terms.
4Q186 measures the goodness and badness of individuals on a nine-point scale,
according to the degree to which their spirits participate in the ‘house of light’
(bet ’or) and the ‘pit of darkness’ (bor ha-hoshekh). The phraseology must surely
echo the ‘fountain of light’ (ma‘yan ’or), and the ‘source of darkness’ (meqor
hoshekh) in the Sermon on the Two Spirits. The nine-point scale ensures that
there are only two categories – good and bad: those who are predominantly good
(5 parts light to 4 parts dark, or better) are good; those who are predominantly
bad (5 parts darkness to 4 parts light, or worse) are bad. The rabbinic category of
the ‘intermediate’ (beinoniyyim), i.e. those in whom good and bad are exactly
balanced, is ruled out.
   When 4Q186 was ﬁrst published it was treated as something of a curiosity. I
and others, however, have argued that it should be taken seriously. It suggests


move into Aquarius, inaugurating the ‘Age of Aquarius’!). The subtle implication appears to be that
the fate of the world was inscribed in the heavens at the time of creation, or, as Omar Khayyam puts
it, ‘And the ﬁrst Morning of Creation wrote/What the Last Dawn of Reckoning shall read’. See
M. O. Wise, Thunder in Gemini and Other Essays on the History, Language and Literature of
Second Temple Palestine (Shefﬁeld: Shefﬁeld Academic Press, 1994), pp. 39–48.
                     ALEXANDER Predestination and Free Will                                       41

that the leadership of the Qumran Community may have applied physiognomic
criteria to determine who should be admitted to their fellowship. Only ‘Sons of
Light’ should be allowed to join, but how could you tell who was a Son of Light?
The Sermon on the Two Spirits speaks of ‘signs’ (’otot) which suggest to which
category a man belongs, but what it lists are virtues and vices such as humility,
charity, greed and deceit. The principle on which it works seems to be ‘by their
fruits shall you know them’. There is no mention of physiognomic criteria.
Physiognomic criteria may have been introduced later, or they may have been
applied by the leadership all along but clandestinely. Curiously 4Q186 is in
code. This was probably not to conceal its content from outsiders, but rather
from insiders. Qumran was a literate community, and one must assume that any
member was capable of reading any text which they might ﬁnd lying around.
This is probably the major reason why certain Qumran texts were put into code.
4Q186 probably contains lore which was restricted to the Maskil. Pythagorean
groups and the later Jewish Merkabah mystics both, apparently, used physio-
gnomy to determine membership. Interestingly some of the later Jewish phsyio-
gnomic texts use Gen. 5.1, ‘This is the book of the generations of man’ (zeh sefer
toledot ’adam), as a biblical peg on which to hang their ideas, taking toledot,
however, not in the sense of ‘generations’, its natural meaning, but in the sense of
‘nature’. It is curious that this same verse is apparently alluded to at the begin-
ning of the Sermon on the Two Spirits in the phrase toledot kol benei ’ish, where
toledot again has its rare, technical sense of ‘nature’.
   There is little doubt in my mind that a strong intertextuality exists between
4Q186 and the Sermon on the Two Spirits. The former is, in fact, a reading of
the latter which attempts to ﬁnd ways of applying its teaching concretely and
practically. It takes the doctrine of the Two Spirits in a highly deterministic way.
The character and destiny of each individual is foreordained. The only question
that arises is how we can discover who has been elected a ‘Son of Light’ and
who rejected as a ‘Son of Darkness’.

Songs of the Sabbath Sacriﬁce. A signiﬁcant allusion to the Sermon on the Two
Spirits occurs in Song 5 of the Songs of the Sabbath Sacriﬁce. The relevant pas-
sage can be pieced together from a number of different fragments as follows:
     For from the God of knowledge comes all that exists forever, and from His knowledge
     [and] his [plan]s have come into existence all eternally ﬁxed times. He makes the
     former things [at] their [time]s and the latter things at their appointed times. And there
     are none among those who have knowledge (who can) discern the [wondrous] revealed
     things before He acts. And when He acts none of the […of] God can comprehend
     what He plans. For they are part of His glorious works. Before they came into being
     [(they were) part of] his [though]t.25

This makes clear that when God is described as the God of ‘knowledge’ what is
in view is not his omniscience in general but speciﬁcally his fore-knowledge, and

  25. See 4Q402 4 12–15; Mas1k i 1–7; 4Q406 1 1–2. See, conveniently, J. H. Charlesworth and
Carol A. Newsom, Angelic Liturgy: Songs of the Sabbath Sacriﬁce (The Princeton Theological
Seminary Dead Sea Scrolls Project 4B; Tübingen: Mohr, 1999), pp. 152–53.
42                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

his fore-ordination of everything that comes to pass. Before he created the world,
and set history in motion, God planned how it would be, and it will follow that
plan to the letter. God’s creatures, even ‘those who have knowledge’ (a term used
widely in Sabbath Songs for the angels), do not know that plan in its entirety,
because as actors in it they cannot stand outside it. It is ultimately mysterious, a
point made in another Qumran text by referring to it as the raz nihyeh, ‘the
mystery that is coming to pass’ (1Q27 1 i 3). But it is disclosing itself, at least to
those who have the discernment to see it, and those with such discernment
‘know’ it in a way the ignorant and uncomprehending mass of humanity does
not.
    What we have here is, on the face of it, a doctrine of general rather than par-
ticular predestination, of the sort that Josephus attributes to the Essenes (Ant.
13.172), but within the theology of Sabbath Songs it may have shaded over into
a doctrine of particular predestination. The text of Sabbath Songs is in a wretch-
edly broken state, which makes any kind of generalization about its argument and
ideas hazardous, but from a close analysis of what survives I have suggested that
it implies a kind of liturgical mysticism. By performing the Songs on earth the
terrestrial worshippers are elevated to join the angelic choirs in heaven, and thus
participate in the angels’ superior nearness to God. That superior angelic near-
ness to God is deﬁned in terms of ‘knowledge’. As I have already noted, a stan-
dard designation for the angels in Sabbath Songs is ‘those who know’. But this
knowledge is not so much knowledge of God himself (God in himself is
unknowable in Sabbath Songs) but rather of God’s grand purposes, and one’s
place in them. It is this latter knowledge which brings in the element of particular
predestination. The supreme ‘knowledge’ to which one can attain is not only to
know that there is a divine purpose to the world, but also to know and accept
one’s place within it. As I have argued at length elsewhere, Sabbath Songs is an
intensely hierarchical document. It presupposes two great matching hierarchies –
an angelic and a human, each with its different but corresponding ranks. Each of
the elect has been assigned from eternity a place within those ranks, a place
which seems to be referred to as his ‘station’ (ma‘amad). His supreme blessed-
ness is to rise to that ‘station’.26

Damascus Document 2.2–13. It has long been recognized that there are signiﬁ-
cant parallels between the Sermon on the Two Spirits and CD 2.2–13.27 Numerous
small similarities of language link the two passages as well as broad agreement in


   26. For a detailed discussion of all this see my The Mystical Texts (Companions to the Dead Sea
Scrolls 7; London: T&T Clark International, 2006); ‘Qumran and the Genealogy of Western
Mysticism’, in Esther G. Chazon (ed.), Proceedings of the Tenth Orion Conference on the Dead Sea
Scrolls (Leiden: E.J. Brill, forthcoming); ‘The Qumran Songs of the Sabbath Sacriﬁce and the
Celestial Hierarchy of Dionysius the Areopagite: A Comparative Approach’, RevQ (forthcoming).
   27. Philip Davies, The Damascus Covenant: An Interpretation of the ‘Damascus Document’
(Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press, 1982), pp. 72–76. The subtle linguistic parallels to the Sermon on the Two
Spirits were well picked up by Chaim Rabin, The Zadokite Documents (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1954), pp. 6–9.
                   ALEXANDER Predestination and Free Will                         43

doctrine. Like the Sermon, CD 2.2–13 divides humanity without remainder into
two camps – the good and the bad. Like the Sermon it is strongly deterministic in
character, and traces everything back to divine causality. The wicked are wicked
because ‘God did not choose them’ (lo’ bahar ’el bahem). The language here is,
of course, borrowed from the election of Israel: God ‘chose’ Israel to be his
people. In not choosing these wicked people he was excluding them from the
community of the saved and condemning them to ‘ﬁery ﬂames at the hand of all
the angels of destruction’. This rejection took place in a past eternity, before the
world existed or these individuals were born (mi-qedem ‘olam u-beterem nosadu)
There is, it seems, a ﬁxed, predetermined list of the righteous, and through ‘those
anointed in His holy spirit and who view His truth’ God has made known to the
elect the names of those who are to be saved. The language is cryptic but it seems
to imply that in practical terms discerning who is and who is not of the elect lies
with the spirit-inspired leadership of the community. Later the Damascus Docu-
ment (13.12) states that the role of the Guardian (mebaqqer) involves examining
‘every man entering the congregation with regard to his deeds, understanding,
strength, ability and possessions, and he shall inscribe him in his place according
to his rank in the lot of light’ (ke-ﬁ heyoto be-goral ha-’or). The Guardian can,
somehow, decide not only whether the postulant belongs to the community of
the saved, but also on his pre-ordained position within it. (We shall return in a
moment to this term ‘lot’, goral, because it is highly relevant to our present
purposes.)
    At ﬁrst sight the statement in line 7, ‘before they were established He knew
their [the damned’s] works’ could be taken as softening the idea of predestina-
tion. God in his omniscience foresaw that the wicked would be wicked, and on
this basis rejected them. This is, of course, a classic position, argued at length by
certain later Christian theologians, but I doubt that this subtlety was intended by
our author. It is strongly negated by his subsequent blunt statement, ‘those whom
He hated He caused to stray’. The force of this should not be missed. The right-
eous elect sin because they are led astray by the agents of evil. Here God appar-
ently plays a similar role towards the wicked. The underlying sense may be that
while God in his mercy protects the elect against the wiles of the wicked one, so
that they will not ﬁnally be deceived, he abandons the wicked to the forces of
darkness, thus ensuring their damnation, but this may be too much of a ration-
alization of the Qumran author’s language. God’s causation of the damnation of
the wicked is apparently formulated here in utterly uncompromising terms.
    There are other similarities between our D passage and the Sermon on the
Two Spirits. Both recognize that evil will exist only for a predetermined period
of time: in the end it will be eradicated and righteousness alone will reign. The D
passage, like the S passage, is clearly sermonic in character, aimed at instruction
of the members of the covenant: note its exhortatory opening: ‘And now hearken
to me, all who enter the covenant’; and both texts occur in somewhat similar
positions within their respective Rules. There are, however, interesting differ-
ences. The D text says nothing about cosmic Spirits of Good and Evil, and it is
much less universalistic in its vision. The wicked in D are deﬁnitely backsliding
44                      Divine and Human Agency in Paul

Israelites, who by their very backsliding show that they do belong to the true
Israel. Its purpose seems primarily to keep faithful those who are within the
Community by warning them of the dire consequences that will befall ‘those
who willfully depart from the Way and despise the Statute’. The enemy envis-
aged is wicked Israel. This is in keeping with the main thrust of Qumran
theology. There is a conspicuous lack of a theology of the Gentiles in Qumran
thought, such as we get in nascent Christianity and in rabbinic Judaism, both of
which assigned to righteous Gentiles an honoured place in the world to come.
Qumran basically writes the Gentiles off: they were never in any sense within the
covenant; they are damned to outer darkness, possibly because they rejected the
Torah whereas Israel accepted it, though not all Israelites obeyed the Torah, and
so most of Israel will also be damned. The Qumran covenanters would deﬁnitely
not have subscribed in any shape or form to the fundamental rabbinic credo that
‘all Israel has a share in the world to come’ (m. Sanh. 10.1). Interestingly the
author of the D passage is less rigorously consistent than the author of the Sermon
on the Two Spirits. Like many later predestinarians he ﬁnds it difﬁcult to live with
the cold logic of his position, and still speaks the language of repentance and
divine forgiveness, as if freedom of choice was still possible in the face of
overwhelming divine foreordination, a point to which we shall return later.
   The nuances and differences of emphasis should not be ignored, but neither
should the profound similarities. The literary relationship between the two texts
is unclear. It is bound up with the highly contested question of the relationship
between the Damascus Document and the Community Rule. My own view is
that. all things considered (and there are many complex issues to consider), the
Damascus Document is essentially the Serekh which governed the lives of the
members of the movement who lived in small communes scattered throughout
the towns of Judaea, and who had their own spiritual mentor known as the Guard-
ian (Ha-Mebaqqer). The Community Rule was the Serekh which governed the
lives of the members of the movement who lived at Qumran, ruled by the Maskil.
The latter led a much stricter, more monastic life than the former. Qumran served
as the mother-house or temple of the movement, and may have been visited on
special occasions, such as the festival of the renewal of the covenant at Shavu‘ot,
by all the covenanters. It is noteworthy that while we have pre-Herodian manu-
scripts of the Community Rule, the Qumran fragments of the Damascus
Document are, almost without exception, in Herodian script.28 This suggests to
me that the Damascus Document is later in origin than the Community Rule, and
that the ‘lay’ wing of the Qumran movement only developed strongly in late
Hasmonean or Herodian times. This in turn would favour the view that CD 2.2–
13 is a reworking of the Sermon on the Two Spirits, perhaps for a less theologi-
cally educated audience.

The Concept of Goral in the Scrolls. We noted earlier that the Guardian’s role
was to assign those who entered the covenant their proper place in the Commu-
nity in accordance with their standing in the ‘lot of light’ (goral ha’or) (CD

  28. The one pre-Herodian manuscript is 4QDa (4Q266).
                    ALEXANDER Predestination and Free Will                                   45

3.12). The word goral used here ﬁgures prominently in the scrolls and in many
ways encapsulates its predestinarian theology. The uses of the term are varied,
but behind them all stands the idea that everything has been foreordained by
God.29 A lot or goral is, of course, a stone or dice which one casts in order to
decide something. With us it is associated with games of chance, and the fall of
the dice is governed by chance. Not so in ancient Israel. There was no such thing
as chance: casting lots was a means of divination, a way of discovering the will
of God. The phrase yasa’ ha-goral (lit. ‘the lot went out’) occurs a number of
times in the scrolls in the context of the decision-making processes of the Com-
munity (1QS 5.3; 6.16, 18–19; 1QSa 1.16–17; CD 13.3–4) . This usage is bibli-
cal, and in the Bible it can refer literally to the casting of lots in order to assign
land, property or priestly duties.30 I doubt that at Qumran, however, it was meant
literally in this context: policy was made, and cases were decided by the exercise
of competent authority, not by simply throwing a dice. This is indicated by the
precise language used, which always qualiﬁes the lot-casting in some way that
points to a more rational procedure: thus 1QS 5.3, ‘By their decision [lit. their
mouth]’, i.e., by the decision of the priests and the multitude of the men of the
Community, ‘the lot shall go forth for the establishment of every matter relating
to law, property and judgement’. Or again, 1QS 6.16, ‘the lot shall go forth at
the decision of the Many’. Or again, 1QS 6.18–19, ‘the lot shall go forth at the
decision of the priests and the multitude of the men of their covenant’. This
recalls the fundamental rabbinic dictum that halakhah follows the majority opin-
ion of the Sages (‘after the majority you must incline’). The Qumran writers may
have retained the language of lot-casting in order to indicate that this process was
a way of discovering the pre-existent will of God (a sentiment with which the
rabbis might well have concurred).
    The possibility cannot be ruled out that literal casting of lots played a part in
deciding who should be admitted to the Community. Stephen Pfann has claimed
that he has identiﬁed actual lot-stones among the artefacts from the Qumran site.
The Qumran covenanters would not be the only group in history to have used
lots to determine membership. One recalls the intriguing parallel in Acts 1.23–
26, where the apostles cast lots as a way of discovering the God’s predestined
choice of successor for Judas:
     They put forward two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was surnamed Justus, and
     Matthias. And they prayed and said, ‘You, Lord, who knows the hearts of all men,
     show of these two the one whom you have chosen, to take the place in this ministry
     and apostleship from which Judas fell away, that he might go to his own place’. And
     they gave lots for them; and the lot fell upon Matthias; and he was numbered with the
     eleven apostles.

It is also possible that when the language of the casting of lots is used in eschato-
logical contexts with regard to the granting of rewards (1QS 4.26; 1QSb 4.25–
26), the literal process is in mind, on the analogy of the apportioning of the land
to the tribes in Joshua 18–19.

  29. See further Alexander and Vermes, Serekh Ha-Yahad, pp. 222–23.
  30. See BDB, p. 174; HAL, p. 185.
46                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   As I said earlier, behind all this lies the idea that each person has a divinely
ordained destiny. It is not surprising, therefore, that goral came to denote that
destiny. This seems to be its meaning in CD 20.3–4, ‘he shall be expelled from
the Congregation, as one whose lot did not fall among the disciples of God’, i.e.,
he shall be expelled as someone about whom it has become manifest that his
                                                                       a
divine destiny is not to be one of the elect. Also noteworthy is 1QH 11.20–23:
      I know that there is hope for someone you fashioned out of dust for the everlasting
      community. The perverse spirit you have puriﬁed from much sin, so that he can take
      his place with the host of the holy ones, and can enter into the community with the
      congregation of the sons of heaven, and you caused to fall to a man his lot with the
      spirits of knowledge, so that he might praise your name with joy in the community,
      and tell of your wonders before all your works.

One could paraphrase the expression ’ish leﬁ goralo (4Q181 1, 5), ‘each man
according to his divinely ordained destiny’. But, in the theology of the Qumran
Community there were only two destinies, to belong to the community of the
saved or to the community of the damned, and goral came to designate those two
communities. Thus 1QS 2.2–5 calls the former, ‘all the men of the lot of God’,
and the latter ‘all the men of the lot of Belial’. Similar language occurs in the
War Scroll. 1QM 1.5 refers to ‘all the lot of Belial’ and 1QM 13.5 contrasts those
of the ‘lot of darkness’ with those of the ‘lot of God’ who will enjoy eternal light.

The War Cycle. Finally, the doctrine of the Two Spirits underlies, or at the very
least chimes closely with, the Qumran doctrine of the eschatological war, in
which the Sons of Light will ﬁnally defeat the Sons of Darkness. The idea of the
eschatological war is implicit in the Sermon on the Two Spirits. It is clear that
this war happens on a number of levels. The major text of the War Cycle31 (the
War Scroll) concentrates on the battle that will be fought out on the terrestrial
plain between human armies, but it and other texts make it perfectly clear that the
battle is simultaneously going on in the unseen spiritual world as well, and that
these two levels are implicated one in the other. This is why the Sons of Light
rely not just on swords and shields and tactical manoeuvres, but deploy also
incantations and spells which are aimed at defeating the satanic forces that
succour and support the enemy. The eschatological war is like a vast game of
three-dimensional chess. The forces ranged against each other in the spiritual
world are, on the side of darkness, Belial/Mastema and his minions (which I
believe are the demons, and not the Fallen Angels), and, on the side of light,
Melchizedek/Michael and the good angels. At an even higher level may stand the
cosmic spirits of Truth and Falsehood to which the Sermon on the Two Spirits
refers. All this can be simply diagrammed as follows:



   31. On the eschatological War Cycle see my article, ‘The Evil Empire: The Qumran Eschato-
logical War Cycle and the Origins of Jewish Opposition to Rome’, in S. M. Paul, R. A. Kraft, L. H.
Schiffman and W. W. Fields (eds), Emanuel: Studies in Hebrew Bible, Septuagint and Dead Sea
Scrolls in Honour of Emanuel Tov (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2003), pp. 17–31.
                     ALEXANDER Predestination and Free Will                                   47


                                             GOD

                                          Level One
              Light                                                     Darkness
                 |                                                            |
              Good                                                          Evil
        The Spirit of Truth                                       The Spirit of Falsehood
        The Spirit of Light                                       The Spirit of Darkness


                                          Level Two
       Melchizedek/Michael                                           Belial/Mastema
                +                                                           +
        The Good Angels                                               The Demons


                                          Level Three
        The Sons of Light                                         The Sons of Darkness
      (The Lot of God/Light)                                   (The Lot of Belial/Darkness)


    Physical warfare with the Sons of Darkness had yet to begin, though the
Community was keenly anticipating it by laying down its strategy and tactics in
its warbooks. But warfare on the spiritual plain had already started: the Commu-
nity was already engaged in a deadly ‘wrestling against principalities and
powers’. This sense of spiritual warfare pervades their ritual and practice.32 All
their spiritual exercises – their prayers, their incantations, their rituals and their
study of Torah – were aimed at protecting the Community’s space, policing its
boundaries, defending it against demonic attack, and strengthening its links with
the spiritual world of God and the good angels. The Community was the redoubt
of the pure and holy from which the forces of good would break out at the
eschaton to overcome the encircling forces of evil. Even the Qumran coven-
anters’ obsession with ritual purity can be seen in this light, if they regarded
impurity as essentially the intrusion of demonic forces into the Community’s
pure and holy domain, which had to be utterly eradicated without delay.


                                        Conclusions
The Sermon on the Two Spirits captures in an unusually coherent and systematic
way a profoundly dualistic and deterministic worldview which was all-pervasive
in Qumran theology. There is every reason to believe that this remarkable treatise
functioned as a primary text of catechesis within the Community, and even if it
did not, its broad ideas were widely disseminated and deeply absorbed.


   32. See my article, ‘“Wrestling against Wickedness in High Places”: Magic in the Worldview of
the Qumran Community’, in: S. E. Porter and C. A. Evans (eds), The Scrolls and the Scriptures:
Qumran Fifty Years After (Shefﬁeld: Shefﬁeld Academic Press, 1997), pp. 318–37.
48                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   Qumran theology paints a stark and bleak picture: the world and history are
seen as a battleground between the forces of good and evil, with evil at present in
the ascendant, but destined ultimately to be defeated and totally eliminated.
Behind this conﬂict stands God, orchestrating in his mysterious wisdom the
activities of both sides. Everything is carried back to the mysterious power of
God, who inscribed the whole unfolding drama before the creation of the world.
He is the cosmic puppet-master who pulls everyone’s strings. There is, appar-
ently, little room here for independent human agency: the good and the bad, men,
angels and demons, act in the end only as agents of God’s grand design. Divine
agency is all.
   The similarities between this worldview and certain much later theologies
are striking. The parallels with high Calvinism are obvious.33 These similarities
should be boldly confronted and explored, because they offer, within the frame-
work of the history of religions, a potential source of insight into the Qumran
mentality. One might consider the social background to such ideas. Do they, for
example, correlate to any signiﬁcant degree with sectarianism? Certainly the
Qumran Community’s worldview was deeply sectarian. They saw themselves as
a small beleaguered group standing for divine truth contra mundum, an island of
light in a sea of darkness. The belief that they were specially chosen, and that an
omnipotent God would ensure that they would be vindicated and ﬁnally triumph,
offered them powerful spiritual succour and support.
   The comparison also raises all the moral arguments which were later urged
against high Calvinism. If all is foreordained, if who is elect and who is damned
is predetermined by God, how can humans be regarded as moral agents, since
moral agency depends on free will? And if humans are not free agents what is
the moral basis of punishment and reward? These were questions with which
the later Calvinists and their opponents were to wrestle mightily. They are not
directly addressed, as far as I am aware, in Qumran literature. They were, how-
ever, problems which exercised Jewish thinkers at the time. Indeed, one of
Josephus’ criteria for differentiating the Jewish sects of his day was their stance
on the question of fate and free-will.34 The failure in the scrolls to confront
these questions inevitably leaves the modern reader with a sense of unﬁnished
theological business.
   The broader comparison provokes one ﬁnal thought. As I have already hinted
in our discussion of CD 2.2–13, it is difﬁcult to live practically and religiously
with strict predestinarianism. The philosopher P. F. Strawson argued in his essay
Freedom and Resentment that however philosophically strong the arguments may


    33. In Calvinist terms the Qumran texts seem to subscribe to the ‘double predestination’
position of the Synod of Dort.
    34. Josephus, Ant. 13. 171–73. See G. F. Moore, ‘Fate and Free Will in the Jewish Philosophies
according to Josephus’, HTR (1929), pp. 371–89. Further, H. A. Wolfson, ‘Philo on Free Will and
the Historical Inﬂuence of his View’, HTR 35 (1942), pp. 131–69, and Gabriele Boccaccini’s essay
in this volume. Note also Paul in Rom. 8.29–30. Whatever this passage means, and there can be few
passages more hotly contested in the Pauline corpus, it shows reﬂection on the question of ‘fate and
free-will’.
                      ALEXANDER Predestination and Free Will                                  49

be for determinism, we all – even those of us who may theoretically subscribe to
it – normally interact with each other in everyday life on the assumption that we
are free agents. We see our fellows as motivated by kindness, or malevolence, or
indifference, and we respond with gratitude, or resentment, or forgiveness.35
When one turns from the cold logic of Calvinist theology to Calvinist devotion,
particularly as expressed in its preaching and hymnography, a very different ethos
is displayed. People are spoken of as if they are free – sinning freely and respon-
sible for their sins, able freely to turn to God and embrace salvation. This reﬂects
the everyday human experience of freedom, of being faced day-in, day-out with
endless choices and apparently choosing between them without any sense of
overwhelming compulsion or constraint – an experience that has the potential to
subvert determinism. This tension is apparent in the scrolls. Often when they talk
of people sinning, there is no hint that these people are acting as other than free
agents. But I must say that I can ﬁnd nothing in the scrolls that logically contra-
dicts their strong predestinarianism. It is remarkably consistent, and remarkably
at the forefront of the covenanters’ minds. The Hodayot, for example, the supreme
expression of Qumran spirituality, is shot through with profound religious feeling
and sentiment, but the predominant theme, as in much Calvinist devotion, is the
psalmist’s profound gratitude for God’s grace in saving him and placing him
                                     a
among the elect (see, e.g., 1QH 11.19–36).36 The singer, deeply conscious of
his own unworthiness and impotence, claims nothing for himself, and ascribes
everything to his God.




   35. P. F. Strawson, Freedom and Resentment, and Other Essays (London: Methuen, 1974).
   36. See further E. H. Merrill, Qumran and Predestination: A Theological Study of the Thanks-
giving Hymns (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1975). The most comprehensive treatment of predestination in the
scrolls is Armin Lange, Weisheit und Prädestination: Weisheitliche Urordnung und Prädestinatiom
in den Textfunde von Qumran (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1995).
                                           Chapter 4

      THE TENSION BETWEEN GOD’S COMMAND AND ISRAEL’S
   OBEDIENCE AS REFLECTED IN THE EARLY RABBINIC LITERATURE1

                                    Friedrich Avemarie


                                         Introduction
The elementary forms of religious experience are manifold, but whether we are
dealing with prayer or miracle, with mysticism or enthusiasm, or with whatever
else, it is always the speciﬁc modes of interaction between a human and a divine
subject which determine the categories whereby we describe and distinguish
these phenomena. In rabbinic tradition, a primary ﬁeld of religious experience is
that of the acceptance and fulﬁlment of God’s commandments.
   The central role of God’s commandments and human obedience within the
Jewish religion is broadly documented by the classical modern reconstructions
of ancient rabbinic soteriology, their controversial approaches notwithstanding.2
The basic idea is that all God’s plans and measures concerning humankind
depend to an essential degree on the way the intended human beneﬁciaries meet
the demands of God’s will. This means that obedience, being a form of human
agency, receives a decisive function within the larger framework of salvation,
which pertains to the agency of God. Since obedience is not an automatic con-
sequence of the promulgation of a commandment, the dependence of salvation
on such human agency means a considerable self-restriction of God’s control.
The human ability to disobey introduces into the divine rule of the world a
moment of uncertainty, instability and even hazard. There is a gap between
God’s plan of salvation on the one side and human obedience on the other, a
break which we may call free will, the contingency of human action, respon-
sibility or suchlike.

   1. For proofreading and for revising the English of this paper, I wish to thank Frau Inka
Rietbrock and Mr Christopher Williamson.
   2. Cf. S. Schechter, Some Aspects of Rabbinic Theology (London: A. & C. Black, 1909), pp.
116–218; G. F. Moore, Judaism in the First Centuries of the Christian Era: The Age of the
Tannaim (3 vols.; Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1927–30), II, pp. 89–111; Str.-B.,
vol. IV.1, pp. 1–22; J. Bonsirven, Le judaïsme palestinien au temps de Jésus-Christ (2 vols.; Paris:
Beauchesne, 1934–35), vol. 2, pp. 3–105; E. E. Urbach, The Sages: Their Concepts and Beliefs
(trans. I. Abrahams; repr., Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987), pp. 315–523; E. P.
Sanders, Paul and Palestinian Judaism: A Comparison of Patterns of Religion (London: SCM
Press; Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1977), pp. 84–238.
     AVEMARIE Tension between God’s Command and Israel’s Obedience 51

   It is striking that even E. P. Sanders, despite his efforts to de-emphasize the
role of obedience and retribution in favour of Israel’s election and covenant,
nevertheless devoted the largest part of his description of rabbinic soteriology to
Israel’s various options of reacting to the commandments and to the respective
consequences of such behaviour.3 It need not be doubted that such enhanced
attention is, in fact, commensurate with the thematic centres of gravity of rab-
binic literature. However, if, in a brief outline of his pattern of rabbinic
soteriology, Sanders speaks of ‘obedience’, ‘disobedience’, ‘failure to obey’ and
the ‘intention and effort to be obedient’,4 this conveys only a faint impression of
the manifold varieties of human response to God’s call. Rabbinic tradition knows
of reluctance, obstinacy, zeal, forgetfulness, indecision, eagerness, commitment,
submission to constraint, desire, repulse and further reactions; the range of possi-
bilities is as rich as human emotionality allows, the sole constant being God’s
ﬁrm demand that Israel be obedient.
   In the following, I shall discuss a selection of passages which may give us
an impression of how the rabbis perceived the tension between command and
obedience, and how, in their opinion, this tension could be overcome.5 In turn,
we shall deal with God’s efforts to enforce obedience (Part 1), with the moti-
vational potency of the Torah itself (Part 2), the anthropological conditions of
obedience (Part 3) and the retrospective effects of obedience upon the Torah
(Part 4) and upon God (Part 5). On occasion, we may also ask to what extent a
given rabbinic idea is apt to either contradict or corroborate the various modern
reconstructions of rabbinic soteriology.

                                     1. Divine Agency
If we consider the subject from the view-point of divine agency, the question is:
How does God stimulate Israel to be obedient?

   3. Cf. Sanders, Paul and Palestinian Judaism, pp. 107–47 and 157–212.
   4. Sanders, Paul and Palestinian Judaism, p. 181.
   5. Unless otherwise indicated, references are based on the subsequent standard editions:
S. Schechter (ed.), Avot de-R. Nathan (Vienna: Lippe, 1887); J. Theodor and C. Albeck (eds.),
Genesis Rabbah (Berlin: Itzkowski, 1912–36); S. Buber (ed.), Lamentations Rabbah (Vilna:
Romm, 1899); M. Margulies (ed.), Leviticus Rabbah (Jerusalem: American Academy for Jewish
Research, 1953–60); H. S. Horovitz and I. A. Rabin (eds.), Mekhilta (Frankfurt: Kauffmann, 1931);
J. N. Epstein and E. Z. Melamed (eds.), Mekhilta de-R. Shimon ben Yohai (Jerusalem: Hillel Press,
1955); D. Hoffmann (ed.), Midrash Tannaim (Berlin: Itzkowski, 1908–9); C. Albeck (ed.), Mishnah
(Jerusalem: Devir, 1952–58); B. Mandelbaum (ed.), Pesiqta de-Rav Kahana (New York: Jewish
Theological Seminary, 1962); I. H. Weiss (ed.), Sifra d’vey Rav (Vienna: Jacob Schlossberg, 1862);
L. Finkelstein (ed.), Sifre on Deuteronomy (Berlin: Jüdischer Kulturbund, 1939); H. S. Horovitz
(ed.), Siphre ad Numeros (Leipzig: Gustav Fock, 1917); D. Romm, et al., Talmud Bavli (Vilna:
Romm, 1880–86); P. Schäfer and H.-J. Becker (eds.), Talmud Yerushalmi (Tübingen: Mohr, 1991–
2001), S. Lieberman (ed.), Tosefta Ki-Fshutah: A Comprehensive Commentary on the Tosefta
(4 vols.; New York: Jewish Theological Seminary, 1955–88); M. Zuckermandel (ed.), Tosefta (Trier:
Lintz, 1882). In addition, I have made use of the facsimile editions of G. Beer (ed.), Mishnah MS
Kaufmann (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1929) and L. Finkelstein (ed.), Sifra MS Assemani 66
(New York: Jewish Theological Seminary, 1956). All subsequent translations of rabbinic texts are
mine. For the translation of Bible verses, in most cases I rely on the NRSV.
52                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   The two most obvious and probably also most frequent types of answer to this
question are based on the ideas of contract and recompense. On the one hand,
God has redeemed Israel from Egypt on condition that Israel embrace the com-
mandments, and Israel has accepted God’s kingdom and therefore must accept
his decrees.6 On the other hand, on Mount Sinai the Israelites were shown the
reward for obedience and the punishment for transgression;7 doing the command-
ments will lead them to the life of the world to come;8 and certain commandments
have been given them for the sole purpose of imparting them reward.9
   Rabbinic texts which unfold these ideas have been treated extensively in
previous scholarship; so going into further detail would be unnecessary. There is
just one thing which I would like to emphasize: both the motivation by contract
and the motivation by retribution are based on extraneous means – extraneous
to the commandments, extraneous to the addressees of the commandments, and
extraneous to the performance of the commandments. A contractual relation is
based on an agreement made in a distant past and may entail consequences which
are not particularly cherished by one or the other party in the present. Moreover,
reward and punishment, though appealing to innate human urges, can motivate
obedience only because they are linked to the performance of the commandments
by some divine causality. Consequently, either model leaves sufﬁcient range, on
the human part, for reluctance, obstinacy and repulse.
   Two examples from Sifre Numbers may illustrate to what extent rabbinic
haggadah is prepared to take account of this. The ﬁrst text presents a parable
which is to explain why, in Num. 15.41, the exodus from Egypt is mentioned in
connection with the commandments:
      What is the matter like? (Like) a king whose friend had a son who was captured, and
      when he ransomed him, he did not ransom him as a freeman but as a slave, so that in
      case he would give orders and (that son) would not accept (them), he could say to him,
      You are my slave! When he arrived in the city, he said to him, Close my sandals! and,
      Take my garments in order to bring them to the bathhouse! That son began to protest.
      He produced against him the deed and said to him: You are my slave! – Thus, when
      the Holy One, blessed be he, ransomed the seed of his friend Abraham, he did not
      ransom them as sons but as slaves, so that in case he would give orders and they would
      not accept (them), he could say to them, You are my slaves! When they set out for the
      wilderness, he began to impose on them some light precepts and some heavy precepts,
      such as the sabbath and the (prohibitions of) incestuous relations and the tassels and
      the phylacteries. The Israelites began to protest. He said to them, You are my slaves. For
      this purpose I ransomed you: for the purpose that I give orders and you fulﬁl (them).
      (Sifre Num. 115, pp. 127–28)

   6. See, e.g., Mekhilta Bahodesh 6 (p. 222); Sifra Shemini, pereq 12.4 (fol. 57b); cf. Schechter,
Aspects, p. 116; Str.-B., vol. IV.1, pp. 488–89; Urbach, Sages, p. 400; Sanders, Paul and Palestin-
ian Judaism, pp. 85–94; F. Avemarie, Tora und Leben: Untersuchungen zur Heilsbedeutung der
Tora in der frühen rabbinischen Literatur (Texte und Studien zum Antiken Judentum, 55; Tübingen:
Mohr Siebeck, 1996), pp. 173–80.
   7. See, e.g., Mekhilta de-R. Shimon b. Yohai on Exod. 20.20 (p. 155); cf. Avemarie, Tora, pp.
556–57.
   8. See, e.g., Avot de-R. Nathan A 2 (p. 9); cf. Avemarie, Tora, pp. 376–99.
   9. See, e.g., t. Sanh. 11.6, 14.1 and t. Neg. 6.1 (pp. 431, 436 and 625); cf. Urbach, Sages, pp.
365–66; Sanders, Paul and Palestinian Judaism, p. 117; Avemarie, Tora, pp. 291–310.
    AVEMARIE Tension between God’s Command and Israel’s Obedience 53

Two observations. First, the parable does not give an explicit reason for the Israel-
ites’ refusal. Obstinacy simply appears to be within the range of Israel’s natural
possibilities. There may be, though, an implicit reason: The sample representing
Israel’s lighter and heavier duties consists of precepts by which the Torah differs
from the laws of other nations. The Sabbath, speciﬁc restrictions of marital
relations, tassels and phylacteries are observances which to keep would never
come to a non-Jew’s mind. If this is meant to motivate Israel’s unwillingness, the
text even justiﬁes this resistance as a natural response to the said precepts. God’s
commands, at least in part, are of such kind that one certainly would not observe
them of one’s own accord. Therefore, constraint is necessary.
    Secondly, the metaphor of slavery is perfectly suited to depict the inevitability
of onerous duty. Unlike, for example, the free subjects of a king, slaves are bound
to fulﬁl the personal wishes of their owners. Obedience even under bothersome
circumstances is a constituent of the notion of slavery. The parable illustrates this
with two pungent examples: Closing the sandals and carrying the garments to the
bathhouse are well-known types of services which Israelite masters by halakhah
are prohibited to require from Israelite slaves.10 Thus, what no pious Israelite
would demand of a slave, God demands, as a matter of principle, of all Israel. It
is quite in line with this that the words ‘not as sons’ explicitly contradict Deut.
14.1. In sum, the parable maintains that insofar as obedience is inconvenient,
extrinsic means of motivation are indispensable.
    Immediately after this text, the midrash proceeds with a second, and grimmer,
illustration of the necessity of extraneous reinforcement. The exegetical point of
departure is the question of why the words I am the Lord, your God, which
appear at the beginning of Num. 15.41, are repeated at the end of the verse. The
midrash explains that it is meant to discourage the Israelites from saying,
     Why did the Maqom (i.e. God) give us commandments? (Is the purpose) not that we
     do (them) and receive reward? (So we) will not do (them) and will not receive reward!
     Just as the Israelites spoke to Ezekiel, as it says: Men of the elders of Israel came to
     me and sat before me (Ezek. 20.1). They said to him, Ezekiel, a slave whom his master
     has sold, is he not exempted from his authority? He said to them, Yes. They said to
     him, Since the Maqom sold us to the nations of the world, we are exempted from his
     authority. He said to them, Behold, a slave whom his master has sold on condition that
     he return (to him), is he exempted from his authority? What is in your mind shall never
     happen … As I live, says the Lord God, surely with a mighty hand and with an out-
     stretched arm, and with wrath poured out, I will be king over you (Ezek. 20.32–33).
     With a mighty hand, this refers to pestilence …; and with an outstretched arm, this
     refers to the sword …; and with wrath poured out, this refers to hunger. After I have
     brought over you these three punishments one after another, I shall be king over you,
     whether you like it or not. (Sifre Num. 115, p. 128)

The passage consists of two sections, both of which deal with the problem of a
resolute disobedience. They treat it in different manners, but since they are par-
alleled by a comparative conjunction (Nyn(k, ‘Just as…’), the answer which is
given at the end of the second section holds for the ﬁrst one alike.


  10. See Mekhilta Neziqin 1 (p. 248); cf. Avemarie, Tora, p. 183.
54                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

    The ﬁrst argument against obedience relies on the principle of retribution. If
obedience is rewarded, it seems logical that someone who does away with reward
may do away with obedience, too. A reason why the Israelites should prefer
disobedience to reward is not given, but this does not impair the logic of the
argument. The obvious answer to the Israelites’ reasoning should be that the out-
come of disobedience will not be a lack of reward but punishment. This answer,
however, is postponed, so that for the moment the argument seems to hold.
    The second argument is stronger, and it involves the idea that Israel’s obli-
gation to obey depends on a foregoing covenant relationship. However, the text
depicts this status as jeopardized by the fact that God has cast his people into
exile, and resuming the metaphor of Israel being enslaved to God (as unfolded
in the preceding parable, see above), it interprets the exile as the sale of a slave
to a new master. The previous covenant relationship seems to be nulliﬁed, and
so there is now a reason for Israel to abandon the Torah.11 As can be almost
expected, the objection produced by Ezekiel stands in blatant contradiction to
the halakhah, which rules, according to Rav in b. Gittin 44a, that if an Israelite
sells a slave to a gentile, this equals manumission. The arbitrariness of God’s
behaviour toward Israel again goes clearly beyond what is permitted to an Israel-
ite. The point is sharp, and the ﬁnal consequence seems inevitable: If reward and
the status of a slave fail to drive Israel to obedience, God cannot but resort to
violence. Here, the metaphor of kingship seems to ﬁt better than that of slavery.
Unlike a private person, a king can conquer, subdue and enslave whom he wants.
    The message of this text is, again, that obedience can be inconvenient and
therefore requires extrinsic means of motivation. However, the harshness of the
imagery has palpably increased.12

                          2. The Inherent Power of the Torah
It is astonishing that within the same imagery of exile and oppression by hostile
nations, Israel’s obligation to the Torah appears in quite a different light, when the
Torah is not viewed as a burden but as a precious possession and when adherence
to it is motivated not by extraneous means but by the inherent value of obedience
itself.
    A striking example is found in Sifra on Lev. 26.44, a verse which afﬁrms
God’s covenantal faithfulness even during Israel’s exile:
      I will not spurn them, or abhor them so as to destroy them utterly (Lev. 26.44). Yet
      what has been left for them so (that you could say) that they have not been spurned
      and have not been abhorred? Were not all the good gifts that had been given to them
      taken away from them? And were it not for the scroll of the Torah which has been left
      for them, they would not differ from the nations of the world at all. (Sifra Behuqqotai,
      pereq 8.10, fol. 112c)

    11. However, since the midrash eventually sweeps aside these considerations, they would not
really jeopardize a covenant-based model of rabbinic soteriology such as that of E. P. Sanders.
    12. For another example of harsh imagery, cf. Mekhilta de-R. Shimon b. Yohai on Exod. 19.17
(p. 143): God suspends Mount Sinai like a tub over the Israelites and says, ‘If you accept the Torah,
it is ﬁne, but if not, then be here your grave’.
    AVEMARIE Tension between God’s Command and Israel’s Obedience 55

As in Sifre Numbers 115, Israel is depicted in a situation of loss and despair.
The ‘good gifts’ that are mentioned include in particular the Land of Israel, the
temple and the kingdom of David. However, Israel’s relation to God is perceived
with reversed premises. Instead of Israel’s determination to sever the tie, the
prevailing emotion is the fear that God might have severed the tie himself. Thus
the one ‘good gift’ that has remained turns into a unique token of the persistence
of God’s promises. Far from being a burden, the scroll of the Torah becomes a
token of the enduring validity of the covenant. Obedience as such is not at issue,
but the text seems to imply that the reason why the Torah still remains with Israel
is the fact that Israel adheres to it. Remarkably, the effect of the possession of the
Torah is described as a distinction from the other nations. This is precisely the
common denominator of those commandments which Sifre Numbers 115 singles
out as particularly onerous for Israel, such as the Sabbath, the tassels and the
phylacteries. Boundary-marking observances apparently could be felt to be a
source both of annoyance and of bliss.
    The following piece of haggadah focuses on the topic of motivation. It is
a story dealing with the hilarity caused by the long-desired fulﬁlment of a par-
ticularly elusive precept:
     It happened that a pious man forgot a sheaf in the middle of his ﬁeld. And he said to
     his son, Go forth and offer up on my behalf a bullock for burnt-offering and a bullock
     for peace-offering. He said to him, My father, what is the reason that you rejoice at
     this commandment more than at all the (other) commandments which are said in the
     Torah? He said to him, The Maqom (i.e., God) gave us all the (other) commandments
     of the Torah (that we may perform them) consciously. But this one (he gave us that we
     may perform it) unconsciously. For if we performed (it) intentionally before the
     Maqom, (a proper fulﬁlment of) this commandment would not come into our hands.13
     (t. Peah 3.8, ed. Lieberman, I, p. 53.)

The pious man’s reaction to his unexpected success is perfect pleasure. His
offering of two bullocks out of joy at the loss of a sheaf portrays him as a person
for whom material loss, compared with the importance of keeping the Torah, is
insigniﬁcant. His mention of God as the giver of the Torah clariﬁes that the
framework of his practice is created by a foregoing divine agency, and there is
no trace of a tension between this divine agency and the responsive agency of
his own (even though the precept of the forgotten sheaf may require rather non-
agency than agency, in that it must be fulﬁlled inadvertently). However, the most
remarkable feature of the story is the question of the son, as it introduces a dis-
tinction within the commandments: at one of them, the father rejoices more than
at all the others. This shows that God’s agency cannot be the only motive of his
obedience, for with respect to their divine origin, all commandments are equal.
Hence, the reason for his obedience lies at least partly in the very commandment
of the forgotten sheaf. There is a strong inherent motivational force emanating
from the Torah itself.
   Does this mean that we can speak of an agency of the Torah? I think, in a cer-
tain way we can. To adduce further evidence might be difﬁcult, however.

  13. For a scriptural proof, the father subsequently adds a reference to Deut. 24.19.
56                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   One of the most well-known rabbinic sayings advocating unselﬁsh obedience
reads hwcm trrwg hwcm, ‘A commandment brings on (another) commandment’,
which seems to intimate that once a commandment has been fulﬁlled, this very
commandment will cause another commandment to be fulﬁlled, and so forth.
Nevertheless, if we examine the context of the saying, we shall see that such an
understanding meets with certain hindrances. The best-known version of the
saying is found in the Pirqe Avot:
      Ben Azzai says: Run (even) after a light commandment, and ﬂee from the transgres-
      sion! For a commandment brings on a commandment, and a transgression brings on a
      transgression. For the reward of a commandment is a commandment, and the reward
      of a transgression is a transgression. (m. Avot 4.2, MS Kaufmann, ed. Beer, p. 342)

The automatism of obedience – and disobedience alike – is described as an end-
less chain. Once caught in this chain, a person’s behaviour will no longer be
determined by his or her decisions but by a steady disposition for either obedi-
ence or disobedience. Thus the text describes more or less what we may call a
habit. However, if at ﬁrst glance it seems to be the very commandment which
by some intrinsic capacity generates further obedience, the continuation of the
saying, which reverses its topic into the negative,14 contradicts the idea of such
an intrinsic causality. The transgression which is said to bring on another trans-
gression is a human act, and such must be, therefore, the ‘commandment’. In sub-
stance, it would be perfectly adequate to render the saying, ‘The fulﬁlment of
a commandment brings on the fulﬁlment of a commandment’. The initial agency
which sets the chain of obedience in motion lies on the human side, not with the
Torah.
   The conclusion of the passage, too, deserves a closer look. It characterizes the
habitual automatism of obedience and disobedience by means of the notion of
reward, which inserts into the chain of habit the agency of God. This, however,
turns the idea of retribution upside down. If the concept of reward is based on
the proportion between an effort and the subsequent receiving of a gain, this
proportion is reduced to absurdity when the effort itself is said to be the gain.
Thus, the statement is but an oxymoronic expression of the idea that continued
obedience is a value in itself.15
   Along the lines of Mishnah Avot 4.2 we may also understand several short
exegeses of Bible verses which mention the hearing, remembering and doing of
the commandments. Numbers 15.39 states that those who ‘see’ their tassels will
‘remember all the precepts of the Lord and do them’, and the midrash concludes,
‘Seeing leads to remembering, remembering leads to doing’.16 Initial human
agency triggers a process by which a series of commandments is fulﬁlled auto-
matically; obedience procreates itself. In equal fashion, the phrase ‘Hearing leads

   14. In the early rabbinic sources, the saying never occurs without this negative continuation; cf.
Sifre Num. 112 (p. 120); Avot de-R. Nathan A 25 and B 33 (pp. 81 and 72).
   15. Cf. K. Kohler, Grundriss einer systematischen Theologie des Judentums auf geschichtlicher
Grundlage (Leipzig: Gustav Fock, 1910), p. 94; Bonsirven, Le judaïsme, II, p. 62; Sanders, Paul
and Palestinian Judaism, p. 122.
   16. hy#( ydyl h)ybm hrykz hrykz ydyl h)ybm hy)r, b. Menahot 43b.
     AVEMARIE Tension between God’s Command and Israel’s Obedience 57

to doing’ interprets Exod. 24.7, where the Bible text curiously has the doing
precede the hearing.17 A midrash on the etymological ﬁgures in Exod. 15.26 and
Deut. 8.19 reads, ‘If someone has heard one commandment, (God) makes him
hear many commandments, as it says, (m#t (wm# M). If a man has forgotten
one commandment, (God) makes him forget many commandments, as it says,
xk#t xk# M)’.18 The topic is again the automatism of habitual obedience.
Divine agency is relied upon in order to ensure continuity.
    The shortest and pithiest expression for the intrinsic value of obedience is the
term hm#l (literally, ‘for her name’), which occurs, in this or in similar forms,
frequently throughout the talmudic and midrashic literature,19 designating ‘the
performance of the Law for its own sake’.20 Curiously, exhortations to act for
the sake of the Torah or the commandments are often emphasized by references
to the retributive consequences of a person’s conduct. An impressive example is
found in a midrash on the verb ‘to break’ in Deut. 32.2:
      R. Benayah used to say: If you have done the words (i.e., the commandments) of the
      Torah for their own sake (Mm#l), the words of the Torah will be life for you, as it
      says, For they are life to those who ﬁnd them (Prov. 4.22). But if you have not done
      the words of the Torah for their own sake, they will kill you, as it says, May my teach-
      ing break forth (Pr(y) like rain, and ‘breaking’ is but an expression for slaying, as it
      says, And they shall break (wpr(w) the heifer’s neck there in the wadi (Deut. 21.4),
      and it says, For many are those she has laid down, and numerous are all her slain
      (Prov. 7.26). (Sifre Deut. 306, p. 338)

The text unfolds quite a complicated network of motivations: Although the com-
mandments require to be done for their own sake, such unselﬁsh obedience is
enforced by a promise of highest reward and a threat of severest punishment. The
addressees are caught by their natural urge of gaining life rather than meeting
death, but if the appeal succeeds, they will immediately have to deny this urge
and surrender to the absoluteness of the Torah.
   The apparent logical inconsistency of such a construction should not, how-
ever, be overemphasized. For it seems that whatever attempt is made to motivate
a thing, it will be inevitable to refer to extraneous circumstances, and thus the
purity of the call for obedience hm#l would be tarnished by any ‘because’
attached to it. In the present context, the perspective of retribution is obviously
intended in a rhetorical sense as a corroboration of, and not in a logical sense as
a detraction from, the central value of acting hm#l. At most, the clumsiness of
the construction may suggest that motivation by the inherent attraction of the

   17. hyy#( ydyl h)ybm h(ym#, Mekhilta de-R. Shimon b. Yohai on Exod. 24.7 (p. 221).
   18. hbrh twcm wl Ny(ym#m tx) hwcm Md) (m# etc., Mekhilta Vayyassa 1 (p. 157); Mekhilta
Bahodesh 2 (p. 208); Sifre Deut. 48, 79, 96 (pp. 111–12, 145, 157); b. Berakhot 40a. Mekhilta
Vayyassa 1 (p. 158) observes that this is compatible with autonomous human agency: ‘The authority
is given (hnwtn tw#rh)’, cf. m. Avot 3.15 (see below); Urbach, Sages, pp. 159–60.
   19. For references, see Schechter, Aspects, pp. 159–60; Moore, Judaism, vol. II, pp. 96–98; H. J.
Becker, Auf der Kathedra des Mose: Rabbinisch-theologisches Denken und antirabbinische
Polemik in Matthäus 23,1–12 (Arbeiten zur neutestamentlichen Theologie und Zeitgeschichte, 4;
Berlin: Institut Kirche und Judentum, 1990), pp. 172–88; Avemarie, Tora, pp. 262–77.
   20. Schechter, Aspects, p. 159.
58                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

commandments was felt to be somewhat inconspicuous so that incentives had
to be added which seemed a bit more palpable. However, even these incentives
remain within the agency of the Torah: The ‘words of the Torah’ are life, and the
‘words of the Torah’ kill.
   We may conclude with a passage which attaches to the Torah an image denot-
ing irresistible force:
     R. Hunah (and) R. Jeremiah (said) in the name of R. Hiyya bar Abba: It is written, and
     they have forsaken me (Jer. 16.11); perhaps they have kept my Torah? If only they had
     forsaken me and kept my Torah! For if they had forsaken me and kept my Torah, by
     their occupying themselves with it, the leaven which is in it would have brought them
     back to me. (Pesiqta de-Rav Kahana 15.5, p. 254)

The biblical basis of this midrash is Jer. 16.11, a verse which deals with the
idolatry committed by former generations of Israel. The ﬁnal part of the verse,
‘…and have forsaken me and have not kept my Torah’, obviously distinguishes
between the rejection of God, which is mentioned ﬁrst, and the neglect of the
Torah, which comes second. The sequence of this twofold withdrawal seems
to insinuate the possibility of abandoning God without yet having forsaken the
Torah. So the midrash imagines how God might react when perceiving Israel at
this very juncture. God need not lose hope, it argues, for the inherent force which
the Torah exerts on those who keep it will bring them back to him. The image of
the leaven characterizes this inherent force as irresistibly effective.21
   We may summarize that wherever rabbinic texts speak of an intrinsic value
of the Torah, obedience seems to be a most natural human aspiration. Disobe-
dience, though mentioned as a possibility, does not seriously play a role. The
tension between command and obedience is here at its minimum.


                           3. Anthropological Conditions
Human nature is ambivalent. On the one hand, humankind was created for the
purpose of living in accordance with the Torah. On the other hand, an evil incli-
nation opposing the Torah is part of the creational condition of every human
being. Abstractly, the openness of human nature for both obedience and disobe-
dience could be formulated in a doctrine of free will. We shall address each of
these topics in turn.

a. Creation
According to rabbinic tradition, the ﬁrst human to be entrusted with the Torah
was Adam. This idea is linked to an exegesis of Gen. 2.15, which occurs both in
the midrashic literature and in the Palestinian targums on the Pentateuch.22 The
following example is taken from an early midrash:

  21. The same idea is conveyed by the image of the leaven in Mt. 13.33 and Lk. 13.21.
  22. Targum Pseudo-Jonathan, Codex Neoﬁti and various fragment-targums. Exhaustive docu-
mentation is provided by H. Lichtenberger, Das Ich Adams und das Ich der Menschheit: Studien
zum Menschenbild in Römer 7 (WUNT, 164; Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2004), pp. 225–40.
    AVEMARIE Tension between God’s Command and Israel’s Obedience 59

     And to serve him (wdb(l, Deut. 11.13), this refers to study. You say, This refers to
     study, but (perhaps) it refers only to work? Behold, it says, And the Lord God took the
     man and put him in the garden of Eden to work it (hdb(l) and to keep it (hrm#l,
     Gen. 2.15). But what (can) working (have been) then and what (can) keeping (have
     been) then? To work it, this refers to the study, and to keep it, this refers to (the per-
     formance of) the commandments. (Sifre Deut. 41, p. 87)

The exegetical inference is quite simple. Since labour for the maintenance of life
became necessary only after the curses of Gen. 3.16–19, the ‘work’ imposed
upon Adam in Gen. 2.15 had to be something else. What it precisely consisted of
was not determined by the scriptural context; so imagination had to ﬁll the gap.
Studying the Torah and doing the commandments were undoubtedly occupations
the rabbis could imagine life in Paradise to be ﬁlled with. A subsequent exegesis
similarly identiﬁes Adam’s work as prayer.23
    It is likely that Adam, within such a construction, is envisaged more as a
model for the covenant people of Israel than as the forefather of all humankind.
Nevertheless, although the midrash clearly draws on biblical chronology, it does
not have any difﬁculties in eclipsing what according to biblical history is the
starting point of Israel’s life with the Torah, namely the revelation on Mount
Sinai. It seems that beside the pattern of the Sinaitic covenant, which generally
predominates in rabbinic literature, there emerges here what we might call a
creational pattern of Torah observance.
    The following piece of haggadah illustrates the same phenomenon. Besides,
it is somewhat more revealing regarding the question of agency:
     The ﬁrst man was obligated to six commandments…24 But you at Sinai have been
     obligated to 613 commandments: 248 prescriptions (h#(b twcm) and 365 prohibitions
     (h#(t )lb twcm). The 248 prescriptions correspond to the 248 limbs which are part of
     a man. Each limb says to the man, I beg you, do this commandment by me! And the 365
     prohibitions correspond to the days of the solar year. Each day says to the man, I beg
     you, do not do this transgression on me! (Pesiqta de-Rav Kahana 12.1, p. 203)

The human body and its natural environment are fashioned in accordance with
the Torah, which implies that conformity to its prescriptions and prohibitions is
the creational purpose of humankind. Although it is probably presupposed that
this purpose can be realized only within Israel, the purpose itself is described as
an anthropological constant independent of Israel’s election.
   However, despite humanity’s being modelled after the Torah, human behav-
iour does not automatically follow the commandments. There is a gap between
the purpose and its realization, which parallels the gap between command and
obedience we meet elsewhere. Although this text substantially differs from those
which speak of an enforcement by extraneous means in that it places the call for
obedience inside the human body,25 this physical disposition does not affect the
individual freedom of decision. Even if the appeal devolves from God upon the
human limbs, it remains an appeal which can be dismissed.

  23. Sifre Deut. 41 (pp. 87–88).
  24. They are subsequently enumerated and discussed at length.
  25. For a contrast, cf. Rom. 7.14–23.
60                           Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   However, the image of the human limbs as agents on behalf of the Torah can
gain quite a different thrust if a paragon of piety such as Abraham is in view:
      R. Shimon ben Yohai said (sc. regarding Abraham): (His) father did not teach him, a
      master he did not have. Whence did he learn the Torah? The Holy One, blessed be he,
      appointed his two kidneys as two rabbis, and they poured forth and taught him wis-
      dom. This is what has been written, I bless the Lord who gives me counsel; in the night
      also my kidneys instruct me (Ps. 16.7). (Gen. Rab. 61.1, p. 657)

Since Abraham’s piety distinguished him from all his contemporaries, it cannot
be explained by a creational pattern of obedience, nor by any other ‘natural’
knowledge of the Torah. But what else can explain Abraham’s obedience? The
answer is found in Ps. 16.7: God made Abraham’s kidneys teach him the Torah.
The wording suggests that persuasion, let alone constraint, was unnecessary in
this case. Abraham’s thankfulness shows that living in accordance with the Torah
had been his deepest desire.

b. Freedom of Will
As we have seen in Sifre Num. 115 and as we can see in numerous other pieces
of haggadah, human beings, including the Israelites, are able to reject the com-
mandments, however God may endeavour to enforce obedience. If in occidental
philosophical tradition this capacity was commonly termed human free will, the
classical rabbinic expression is tw%#Or:, literally, ‘authority’.26 It appears in a famous
tannaitic saying, which the Mishnah attributes to R. Aqiva:27
      All is viewed, and the authority is given (hnfw%tn: tw%#Or:hfw: yw%pcf lk%oha). And in goodness
      the world is judged, and all is according to the majority of the deed. (m. Avot 3.15, MS
      Kaufmann, ed. Beer, p. 341)28

Three of the four subsections of this saying are formulated in the passive voice,
and the notion of a judgment over the whole world indicates that this passive
voice is a passivum divinum. It is God who views everything and who bestows
authority, and the recipient of authority is humankind.
   The further interpretation of the saying is controversial, due to the ambiguity
of the verb hpc, which in the early rabbinic literature covers both the meaning
of a natural watching29 or looking out30 and that of a supernatural perception of

   26. Dictionaries of modern Hebrew usually distinguish between tw@#OrF ‘government’ and tw@#Or:
‘authority, control, permission’. M. Jastrow, A Dictionary of the Targumim, the Talmud Babli and
Yerushalmi, and the Midrashic Literature (London: Luzac & Co., 1903), p. 1499, groups both clus-
ters of meaning under the sole entry of tw@#OrF. In m. Avot 3.15, however, both MS Kaufmann (see
below) and ed. Albeck have tw@#Or:.
   27. Further texts are discussed in Str.-B., vol. IV.1, p. 7; Urbach, Sages, pp. 260–85; K. Hruby,
Aufsätze zum nachbiblischen Judentum und zum jüdischen Erbe der frühen Kirche (Arbeiten zur
neutestamentlichen Theologie und Zeitgeschichte, 5; Berlin: Institut Kirche und Judentum, 1996),
pp. 95–97.
   28. For problems of the textual transmission, see S. Safrai, ‘ “And All Is According to the
Majority of Deeds” ’, Tarbiz 53 (1968–69), pp. 33–40. Apart from a spelling variant, however, the
text of MS Kaufmann is identical with the textus receptus as given in Albeck (ed.).
   29. Cf. m. Sukk. 3.9: R. Aqiva watches his colleagues waving the lulav; Lev. Rab. 20.4 (p. 456):
the high priest watches smoke ascending from the altar.
     AVEMARIE Tension between God’s Command and Israel’s Obedience 61

things happening far away,31 in the distant future32 or in a transcendent reality.33
Hence, the exegetical tradition is split as to whether God is said to foresee or
rather to watch what humans are doing.34
   It seems that the second half of the saying, which is dominated by the idea of
retribution, supports the latter reading: if humans are free to obey or disobey
God’s commands, they should nevertheless keep in mind that owing to God’s
watchfulness none of their deeds and misdeeds will escape judgment. However,
this does not preclude that the former reading, too, makes sense. The structure of
the saying suggests that, in fact, the former reading is to be preferred. For it is
likely that if a general statement is to be qualiﬁed by a more particular one, the
general statement will come ﬁrst and the more particular one will follow, so as to
make the qualiﬁcation obvious. In the juxtaposition of the notions of autonomous
human agency and divine surveillance, however, it is clearly the latter which
conﬁnes the former, wherefore the order of the two statements should be ex-
pected to be inverse: ‘Autonomy is granted, (but) everything is watched’. Things
are different if we understand ywpc lkh in the sense of divine foreknowledge.
The idea of God’s prescience implies that future events can be avoided as little as
past events can be made undone, which apparently contradicts the idea that the
determination of whether or not an event will occur lies, at least in speciﬁc cases,
with the human subject. Thus, the general statement is that of divine prescience,
and the statement of autonomous human agency comes in as a qualiﬁcation, in
due second place: ‘Everything is foreseen, (but) autonomy is granted’. To be sure,
the saying does not betray how the contradiction between divine foreknowledge
and autonomous human action can be resolved.35 However, it is obvious that if


   30. Cf. Gen. Rab. 42.4 (p. 409): War between the nations is a sign to look out for the advent of
the Messiah.
   31. Cf. y. Sotah 1.4/4 (vol. III, p. 83): R. Meir views in the holy spirit a husband upbraiding his
wife; Gen. Rab. 72.5 (p. 841): God sees that Leah has the ‘intention (hnwk) of procreating tribes’.
   32. Cf. y. Sanh. 8./1 (vol. IV, p. 180): Joshua foresees the distribution of the Land of Israel;
Gen. Rab. 82.10 (p. 988): Jacob foresees the return of the exiles; Lev. Rab. 36.4 (p. 848): a horo-
scope predicts the birth of a daughter to a man sentenced to death; Pesiqta de-Rav Kahana 4.3
(p. 60): astrologers foresee the death of Egyptian craftsmen.
   33. Cf. t. Hag. 2.2: Ben Zoma beholds the mysteries of creation.
   34. The former position was prominently held by Maimonides, who was followed by most
modern ‘classics’; cf. Kohler, Grundriss, p. 176; Moore, Judaism, I, p. 455; Str.-B., vol. IV.1, p. 7;
Bonsirven, Le judaïsme, I, p. 187 n. 6; Sanders, Paul and Palestinian Judaism, 132; see also
D. Winston, ‘Free Will’, in A. A. Cohen and P. Mendes-Flohr (eds.), Contemporary Jewish Reli-
gious Thought: Original Essays in Critical Concepts, Movements, and Beliefs (London and New
York: Macmillan, 1987), pp. 269–74 (p. 272). The latter position was adopted by Schechter,
Aspects, p. 285, and strongly advocated by Urbach, Sages, p. 257, whose reasoning is accepted by
C. H. Manekin, ‘Introduction’, in idem and M. M. Kellner (eds.), Freedom and Moral Responsi-
bility: General and Jewish Perspectives (Bethesda: University Press of Maryland, 1997), pp. 1–17
(p. 9), and R. H. Bell, No one seeks for God: An Exegetical and Theological Study of Romans 1.18–
3.20 (WUNT, 106; Tübingen: Mohr, 1998), pp. 241–42. For mediaeval comments, see Urbach,
Sages, p. 802 n. 11; J. Goldin, The Living Talmud: The Wisdom of the Fathers and Its Classical
Commentaries (New York: New American Library, 1957), pp. 141–42.
   35. On a literal level, one might perhaps doubt the contradiction, since prescience is not prede-
62                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

indeed the two ideas are meant to interfere with each other, their juxtaposition is
highly signiﬁcant.
    Along these lines, we can understand the whole of the saying as a twofold
paradox, with its four subsections contradicting each other two by two. Judge-
ment according to the majority of deeds requires exactness, which is opposed to
goodness, and the authority of a person to determine his or her actions implies
the unpredictability of these actions, which is opposed to prescience.
    The punch-line of the saying, however, lies not so much in the juxtaposition
of human autonomy with divine prescience as in its connection with divine
retribution.36 Retribution and autonomous human agency are inextricably inter-
dependent, the implicit link being the idea of responsibility.37 Judgement would
be nonsensical, were it not presupposed that acts can be attributed to the ultimate
causality of a person’s decision. Conversely, the assumption of a free will would
be superﬂuous if a person’s acts were not subject to anyone’s approval or disap-
proval. To be sure, considerations of this kind may be susceptible to various
objections, but the argument of this text seems to run along these lines. The pos-
tulate of responsible human agency is regarded as necessary in order to guarantee
the possibility of judgement.
    A further piece of haggadah which reﬂects the tension of God’s foreknow-
ledge and human responsibility is a midrash on the commandment concerning the
parapet of the roof in Deut. 22.8. According to the Bible text, the purpose of this
commandment is to avoid accidents: ‘…lest you have blood-guilt on your house
if anyone should fall from it (wnmm lpnh lpy yk)’. The ﬁnal sub-clause, how-
ever, can be read not only as a hypothetical condition, but also as an explanatory
statement of fact. And this is what the midrash takes it to mean:



termination. (Similarly, judgement ‘according to the majority of the deed’ is a principle so lenient
that it resembles a judgement ‘in goodness’ much more than the standards of strict justice.) How-
ever, the juxtaposition of God’s prescience and human autonomy would be pointless if there were
no friction between them at all. I am grateful to Seth Kunin and Philip Alexander for having in-
sisted on this point!
   36. Considering this, the debate on ywpc lkh seems to be of relatively secondary importance.
However, the linkage of retribution with prescience, too, entails speciﬁc issues, such as the question
of the proper time for judgement. Thus, it is argued in y. Rosh Hash. 1.3/8 (vol. II/5–12, p. 187) that
God, although he ‘sees the future incident (dlwnh t) h)wr)’, judges a man only according to ‘the
hour in which he stands’. However, m. Sanh. 8.5 explains the stoning penalty for the ‘stubborn and
rebellious son’ (Deut. 21.18–21) by his predictable future: He ‘shall be judged on account of his
end. He shall die righteous and shall not die guilty…’
   37. To be sure, rabbinic Hebrew lacks a term for ‘responsibility’, even though the idea is
undoubtedly present, particularly in texts dealing with God’s judgement; cf., e.g., the parable of the
lame and the blind in Lev. Rab. 4.5 (pp. 88–89) and the story of the rejected offer of the Torah to
Israel’s neighbours in Mekhilta Bahodesh 5 (p. 221). In modern Hebrew, ‘responsibility’ translates by
twyrx), which, in fact, occurs in rabbinic literature, but only as a legal term denoting ‘mortgaged
property’ or ‘property which may be resorted to in case of non-payment’, Jastrow, Dictionary, p. 41.
For the general lack of expressions for ‘responsibility’ in antiquity, see Manekin, ‘Introduction’,
p. 8; R. McKeon, ‘The Development and the Signiﬁcance of the Concept of Responsibility’, Revue
internationale de philosophie 11 (1957), pp. 3–32 (pp. 8–13).
     AVEMARIE Tension between God’s Command and Israel’s Obedience 63

      For the faller will fall from it. The Holy One, blessed be he, said: It is open and known
      ((wdyw ywlg) before me that this one will ultimately fall from it. However, I do not
      want that an offence come to pass at your hands, as it says, I made you a foreseeing
      man (hpc Md) Nb) for the house of Israel (Ezek. 3.17). (Midrash Tannaim, p. 137)

The indicative of the biblical wording is understood as an expression of certi-
tude,38 and this certitude is explained by divine prescience, the fall of the ‘faller’
being ‘open and known’ to the author of the Torah.39 This, however, means that
the parapet will not prevent the accident;40 therefore its purpose must be a dif-
ferent one. It has to do, the midrash argues, with the attribution of responsibility:
if the parapet is installed, the owner of the house cannot be held accountable,
though the fall may inevitably occur.
    It is striking in what different ways the midrash brings the agency of God into
relation with the human beings involved in the matter. The fall of the ‘faller’ is
unavoidable; here God does not intervene; he merely perceives what is eventu-
ally going to happen. The addressee of the commandment, however, appears not
at all as subject to an inescapable destiny. In his case, there is no foreknowledge;
rather, God has a wish (#qbm), and the fulﬁlment of this wish, despite its divine
origin, does not come about automatically, but is made contingent upon the con-
sent of the human addressee.41 It seems as if the promulgation of a command-
ment exempted human action from God’s prescience.42 In a certain way, this
sounds like a theory in nuce of the anthropological prerequisites for the bestowal
of the Torah.


   38. A parallel in b. Shabb. 32a mentions in particular the participle lpwnh. For the mediaeval
reception of this exegesis, see D. J. Lasker, ‘The Obligation of the “Parapet” and Moral Respon-
sibility’, in Manekin and Kellner (eds.), Freedom, pp. 153–64.
   39. b. Shabb. 32a puts this in even more drastic words: ‘This one was doomed (yw)r) to fall
since the six days of creation, for he has not (yet) fallen and Scripture calls him “faller”’. Lasker,
‘“Parapet”’, pp. 154 and 157, translates yw)r by ‘deserved’ and takes it as a hint at some previous
crime committed by the ‘faller’; thus also R. Hammer (trans.), Sifre: A Tannaitic Commentary on
the Book of Deuteronomy (Yale Judaica series, 24; New Haven, London: Yale University Press,
1986), p. 469. However, a clear reference to such guilt is lacking not only in b. Shabb. 32a but also
in the comments of Rashi and R. Bahya ben Asher on which Lasker relies. The tradition simply
does not care why the ‘faller’ must fall.
   40. Either he will fall over the parapet or he will fall elsewhere. The latter is assumed by Lasker,
‘“Parapet”’, pp. 155 and 163.
   41. The parallel in b. Shabb. 32a concludes with a widely attested proverbial saying, which also
occurs in Sifre Deut. 229 on Deut. 22.8 (p. 292): ‘They bring about merit by a meritorious person
(y)kz ydy l( twkz Nylglgm) and guilt by a guilty person (byyx ydy l( hbwxw)’. Translations
which render Nylglgm in the passive voice seem to suggest that merit and guilt are occasioned by
the respective humans themselves; cf. Jastrow, Dictionary, p. 244; Urbach, Sages, p. 267; Hammer,
Sifre, p. 239. However, since in rabbinic Hebrew the impersonal plural participle often implies God
as subject, it seems that Nylglgm points to divine agency. If this is correct, the saying purports that
God ensures the possibility of ascribing good and bad deeds to their respective doers, and thus gives
further expression of God’s intention to rely on human responsibility.
   42. For the idea that the revelation of the Torah creates responsibility, cf. Mekhilta de-R. Shimon
b. Yohai on Exod. 20.20 (p. 155), where Moses announces on Mount Sinai: ‘Heretofore you sinned
inadvertently (Nyggw#), now you sin wantonly (Nydyzm)’.
64                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   The neat distinction between the will of God and the autonomy of human
action being presupposed, there emerges of course the moral requirement of
bringing human action into accordance with God’s will, and this in turn leads to
the question of whether this autonomy will be affected, if a person complies with
God’s command. A saying which Mishnah Avot attributes to Rabban Gamaliel,
son of R. Judah the Prince, deals with this issue in a rather puzzling way:
      He used to say: Do his will as (if it were) your will that he may do your will as (if it
      were) his will. Cancel your will in face of his will that he may cancel the will of others
      before your will. (m. Avot 2.4, MS Kaufmann, ed. Beer, p. 341)

The logic of the second part of this exhortation is that a person will succeed with
his or her ends by cancelling them in favour of the will of God. At the surface,
the rationale is that of a barter, in that it promises gain on either side. It is, how-
ever, a rather paradoxical kind of barter, since on the human part the prospective
gain has to be sacriﬁced beforehand, and it is by no means clear what will be left
of a person’s will once it has been cancelled before the will of God. The train of
reasoning is similar to that of the reinforcement of unselﬁsh obedience by the
outlook on retribution in the saying of R. Benayah in Sifre Deut. 306 (see above).43
Both of these texts show that, on the premise of an autonomous human agency,
bridging the gap between the human will and the will of God involves consider-
able logical difﬁculties. For practical morality these difﬁculties may be of little
consequence, since the possibility of submitting one’s own will to the will of
someone else is proven by everyday experience. Nevertheless, the experience of
being deprived of or acting contrary to one’s will under a foreign constraint is
likewise so common that those difﬁculties should not be overlooked. Mishnah
Avot 2.4 mirrors a clear awareness of them.
   An easier solution to the problem of merging human agency into God’s will is
given in the following amoraic piece of haggadah:
      R. Levi said: Six things serve a man, three (are) under his control (wtw#rb) and three
      are not under his control. The eye and the ear and the nose are not under his control: he
      sees what he does not want; he hears and smells what he does not want. The mouth,
      the hand and the leg are under his control: if he wants, he studies the Torah; if he
      wants, he slanders; if he wants, he reviles and blasphemes. (By) the hand, if he wants,
      he dispenses charities; if he wants, he steals and kills. (By) the foot, if he wants, he
      goes to the synagogues and study-houses; if not, he goes to the theatres and circuses.
      But when a man is deemed worthy (hkz), the Holy One, blessed be he, turns those
      which are under his control into such ones which are not under his control. The mouth,
      (as it says,) Yes, and blessed he shall be! (Gen. 27.33). The hand, (as it says), But the
      hand that he stretched out against him withered etc. (1 Kgs. 13.4). The leg, (as it says,)
      My child, do not walk in their way etc. (Prov. 1.15). (Gen. Rab. 67.3, p. 756–57)

According to this, God can make human beings do his will by occasionally can-
celling their autonomous agency. Interventions of this type, however, are limited
to the righteous. The biblical examples which are adduced deal with righteous


   43. And, for that matter, to the promise of saving one’s self by the sacriﬁce of one’s self in Mk
8.35.
     AVEMARIE Tension between God’s Command and Israel’s Obedience 65

individuals who are prevented from committing errors or sins. Obviously God’s
intervention corresponds to a person’s deserts. Thus, what the text describes is
comparable to the principle of hwcm trrwg hwcm as formulated in Mishnah Avot
4.2 (see above).

c. The Evil Inclination
For the pious mind, the aim is, of course, to conform itself to the will of God,
which entails that deviation from God’s commandments is considered as bad.
The cause for deviation, however, the rabbis do not ﬁnd in an ill will44 but in a
different kind of human disposition, the (rh rcy, man’s ‘evil inclination’.
   The natural target of this evil inclination appears to be not only disobedience
toward God but also the misleading, seduction and damaging of its very owner.45
Curiously, its agency can have casual positive effects, such as propagation and
the production of wealth.46 In accordance with the monism of the Jewish world-
view it is even thought to be created by God.47 Nevertheless, humans are ex-
pected to subdue their evil inclination,48 and for obvious reasons the one weapon
rabbinic tradition recommends for this ﬁght is the Torah. A talmudic parable
compares the Torah’s effect on the evil inclination to that of a plaster which
neutralizes the harm caused by an incurable wound, and concludes that:
      Thus, the Holy One, blessed be he, said to the Israelites, My children, I created the evil
      inclination and I created the Torah as a remedy against it.49 And if you occupy
      yourselves with the Torah, you will not be delivered into its hand, as it says, If you do
      well, will you not be accepted? (Gen. 4.7) And if you do not occupy yourselves with
      the Torah, you will be delivered into its hand, as it says, Sin is lurking at the door
      (ibid.). (b. Qidd. 30b)

Given this natural opposition between the Torah and the evil inclination, it is
evident that the latter can be also said to remonstrate against the commandments.
However, in case we should expect a total opposition against God’s command-
ments, the following text makes us witness to a much more subtle proceeding:


   44. A (r Nwcr is, as far as I can see, never mentioned in the early rabbinic literature. The closest
association of Nwcr and (r I found in an exegesis of Jer. 39.12 in Lam. Rab., petihta 34 (p. 37),
where Nebuchadnezzar orders Nebuzaradan to spare Jeremiah, ‘but against his people, act for the bad
according to your will (h(rl Knwcrk h#()’.
   45. Children are attracted by scorpions and ﬁre, adults are attracted by idolatry and forbidden
sexual relations, etc.; cf. Avot de-R. Nathan A 16 (pp. 63–64), b. Qidd. 81b, b. Avod. Zar. 17a–b,
b. Yoma 69b; Str.-B., vol. IV.1, pp. 466–83; P. W. van der Horst, ‘A Note on the Evil Inclination and
Sexual Desire in Talmudic Literature’, in U. Mittmann-Richert et al. (eds.), Der Mensch vor Gott
(Festschrift H. Lichtenberger; Neukirchen-Vluyn: Neukirchener Verlag, 2003), pp. 99–106.
   46. Cf. Gen. Rab. 9.7 (pp. 71–72).
   47. Cf., e.g., b. Qidd. 30b (see below).
   48. However, according to Gen. Rab. 59.7 (p. 636) Abraham’s evil inclination was subdued to
him by God, which can be perhaps interpreted along the lines of m. Avot 4.2.
   49. The exegetical basis of this statement is an al tiqre midrash on Deut. 11.18, which reads the
words Mtm#w, ‘and you shall place (these words at your heart)’, as Mt Ms, ‘perfect drug’. In some-
what different words, this tradition is also preserved in Sifre Deut. 45 (pp. 103–104).
66                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

      My statutes you shall observe (Lev. 18.4). These are (the) precepts written in the Torah
      which, if they had not been written, would rightly have had to be written, such as (the
      laws concerning) robbery and incest and idolatry and the cursing of (God’s) name and
      the shedding of blood. For if they had not been written, they would rightly have had to
      be written. And my ordinances you shall keep (ibid.). These are (the) precepts ordained
      in the Torah to which the evil inclination objects and to which the nations of the world
      object, such as (the commandments regarding) the eating of pork and the wearing of
      mixed kinds and the stripping off (of the sandal) by the sister-in-law and the puri-
      ﬁcation of the leper and the expulsion of the scapegoat. For the evil inclination objects
      to them and the nations of the world object to them. Scripture teaches, I am the Lord, I
      ordained them, and you are not entitled to object to them. (Sifra Ahare-mot, pereq
      13.10, MS Assemani 66, ed. Finkelstein, p. 373)

Siding with the nations of the world, the evil inclination pleads on behalf of
rationality and attacks only those of God’s commandments which thanks to their
conspicuous absurdity appear to be particularly bothersome.50 Whereby, nev-
ertheless, it calls into question the Torah as a whole. Be it, as here, the abstention
from pork, the prohibition of mixed kinds and the cleansing of the leper or, as in
other rabbinic texts, the Sabbath, the tassels and the phylacteries (cf. above, Sifre
Num. 115), human resistance against God’s demands is preferably attached to
those precepts by which Israel is distinguished from its neighbouring nations. It
is not obedience as such to which human agency opposes a natural inertia, it is
those commandments which constitute the singularity of the Torah.
   A last example may show that the vexation by these particularly bothersome
commandments, surprisingly, could also be given a positive evaluation:
      R. Elazar ben Azariah says: Whence (can it be inferred) that one must not say, ‘I do
      not want to wear mixed kinds, I do not want to eat pork, I do not want to have
      incestuous intercourse’, but rather, ‘I do want, (but) what can I do, for thus my Father
      in heaven has decreed upon me’? Scripture teaches, And I have separated you from the
      other peoples to be mine (Lev 20.26). (Such a man) is found to separate himself from
      the transgression and to accept upon him the kingdom of Heaven. (Sifra Qedoshim,
      pereq 11.22, fol. 93d)

Framed by such reasoning, reluctance in face of the commandments is not refusal
against God, but a foil which enhances the merit of obedience, and it does so far
better than any unreserved submission could do. The more inconvenient obedi-
ence is, the more respect it deserves. Paradoxically, reluctance can therefore
even be called for. Speaking in modern terms, the burden of the commandments
assures the Israelites that their obedience cannot be prompted by human pro-
jection. Autonomous human reason feels the need of being overpowered by the
otherness of God’s revelation.

            4. Human Co-operation in Deﬁning the Commandments
The authority of the Mosaic scriptures notwithstanding, it was the commonly
recognized task of the rabbinic sages to complement the written law by an oral

   50. These precepts are identiﬁed with the ‘ordinances’ (twqx) of Lev. 18.4, as opposed to the
‘statutes’ (My+p#m) mentioned in the same verse, which the midrash takes to refer to the reasonable
commandments.
     AVEMARIE Tension between God’s Command and Israel’s Obedience 67

tradition which virtually consisted of progressive ramiﬁcations in order to clarify
the precepts and render them practicable. Since it was not Israel as a whole but
only the class of the sages who was engaged in this task, we may deal with this
topic rather brieﬂy. Nevertheless, it is striking that the rabbinic literature displays
a clear and self-conﬁdent awareness of the fact that in the realm of halakhah,
scholarly decisions successfully compete with the will of God.51
    A very obvious example is the rabbinic intercalation of the calendar, which
not only has absolute validity on earth but also determines the course of certain
heavenly procedures. Thus, if God, anticipating the impending New Year’s Day,
has the setting for the annual heavenly judgment arranged, while the earthly court
decides to postpone the beginning of the New Year, God will have to say ‘to the
ministering angels: Remove the platform, the attorneys may go away, the prose-
cutors may go away, because my children resolved to postpone it to tomorrow’.52
    In a famous haggadic account of an early tannaitic controversy (b. Baba Metzia
59b), the teaching of R. Eliezer receives divine approval by a series of supporting
miracles – a carob-tree uproots itself, a watercourse runs backwards, the walls of
the study-house tilt – but the opposing majority of the sages refuses to accept this
kind of evidence. And even when a heavenly voice declares that the halakhah
follows R. Eliezer, R. Joshua retorts that the Torah ‘is not in heaven’. In the end,
God laughingly resigns and avows, ‘My children defeated me, my children
defeated me!’ The text thus provides an astounding instance of human agency
which explicitly opposes God’s manifest will but nevertheless succeeds, after
some tugging, in moving God to come round. To be sure, this curious kind of
competition is contingent upon the speciﬁc conditions of the bestowal of the
Torah. As it seems, by revealing his law, God not only made manifest his divine
authority, but simultaneously also ceded part of this very authority to an earthly
institution.53
    Less dramatic from the narrative point of view, but theologically just as daring
is a saying cited at the end of Mishnah Berakhot. It is adduced as a comment on
certain changes in liturgy which purportedly had been necessitated by a decline
in popular piety, and it simply consists of a reversal of the two halves of Ps.
119.126: ‘They broke your law. It is time to act for the Lord!’54 It may be trivial
that changing times require changes in customs, but the Mishnah justiﬁes them
by the claim that the sages introduced them on behalf of God. Thus, from being a
response to the manifest will of God, the Jewish observances are turned into an
expression of a manifest will of Israel. Rather than being their author, God
appears to be their beneﬁciary. This leads us to our last topic.


    51. On competing rabbinic models of halakhic authority, see A. Sagi, ‘Models of Authority and
the Duty of Obedience in Halakhic Literature’, AJSR 20 (1995), pp. 1–24.
    52. y. Rosh Hash. 1.3/14–15 (vol. II/5–12, p. 188–89).
    53. Cf. the mediaeval explanation of b. B. Metzia 59b by R. Nissim Gaon as related by Sagi,
‘Models’, p. 5: ‘God’s Torah is complete…, and He has advised us that nothing will be changed in
it, and no contradictions or doubts remain in our Torah that would require a sign from Heaven’.
    54. m. Ber. 9.5 (vol. I, p. 33). Other than in modern Bible translations, the adverbial compound
‘for the Lord’ is here not connected to the noun ‘time’ but to the verb ‘act’.
68                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul


                        5. God’s Dependence on Human Action
From the idea that halakhic decisions are taken for the beneﬁt of God, it is only a
little step to the notion that God is dependent on pious human activity. Israel’s
obedience adds to God’s power, as it reads in an amoraic midrash, nay, God
proves to be God if Israel bears witness to him, as it is stated in another one.
Common modern views of rabbinic soteriology seem to be turned upside down.
The election of Israel may be presupposed, as the said capacity of afﬁrming God’s
being God primarily lies with Israel (rather than humankind). But the purpose of
the covenant is reversed. Had we expected that it is the salvation of Israel, it turns
out to be, as it were, the salvation of God. Of course, one may understand such an
imagination of a salvation of God as just another way of expressing one’s belief in
the persistence of the covenant. In any case, however, this persistence is said to
depend entirely on human action. Thus, the following passages ascribe to human
agency the highest salviﬁc value that can be thought of. By the way, the expres-
sion ‘as it were’ (lwkybk) occurs quite conspicuously in these texts, which shows
that they move at the very fringes of what rabbinic theology dares to imagine. The
ﬁrst example consists of a twofold saying of amoraic origin:
      R. Azariah (said) in the name of R. Judah the son of R. Simon: Whenever the right-
      eous do the will of the Holy One, blessed be he, they add force to the Power
      (hrwbgb xk Nypyswm),55 as you say, And now, therefore, let (the power of the Lord) be
      great etc. (Num. 14.17). But if not, as it were, You were unmindful of the Rock that
      bore you (Deut. 32.18).

      R. Judah the son of R. Simon (said) in the name of R. Levi ben Parta:56 Whenever the
      Israelites do the will of the Holy One, they add force to the Power, as you say, With
      God we shall do valiantly (Ps. 60.14). But if not, as it were, They ﬂed without strength
      before the pursuer (Lam. 1.6). (Pesiqta de-Rav Kahana 25.1, p. 380)

The two parts of the text are entirely analogous in structure. If, nevertheless, a
difference in substance is intended, it must have to do with the difference between
the ‘righteous’ mentioned in the ﬁrst part and ‘Israel’ being dealt with in the sec-
ond. The fact, however, that among the righteous there may be individual Gen-
tiles57 whereas the people of Israel may include a number of sinners58 cannot play
a decisive role, for the text clearly envisages the possibility that the righteous,
too, can fail to do the will of God.59 So it rather seems that the crucial difference
lies in the idea of election, which is a constituent of the concept of ‘Israel’ but
scarcely touches the concept of the ‘righteous’. Apparently, the text suggests a


   55. For hrwbg as an epithet of God see Str.-B., vol. I, pp. 1006–7, on Mt. 26.64.
   56. In almost identical words, this saying is also related in Lam. Rab. on Lam. 1.6 (p. 70).
   57. Cf. t. Sanh. 13.2 (p. 434), b. Sanh. 105a; F. Avemarie, ‘Erwählung und Vergeltung. Zur
optionalen Struktur rabbinischer Soteriologie’, NTS 45 (1999), pp. 108–26.
   58. As a distinct subgroup within Israel, the sinners can be designated as l)r#y y(#wp, ‘the
sinners of Israel’, or l)r#y y)nw#, ‘the haters of Israel’; cf., e.g., t. Sanh. 13.4 (p. 434), y. Sanh.
6.9/2 (vol. IV, p. 181), b. Eruv. 19a, b. Rosh Hash. 17a.
   59. The same idea occurs in Sifre Deut. 47 (p. 106).
     AVEMARIE Tension between God’s Command and Israel’s Obedience 69

double perspective on its central statement: the enhancement of God’s power by
human obedience can be viewed simultaneously as depending on and as being
independent of the framework of Israel’s status as the chosen people.
   A further striking feature of the text is the lack of symmetry between the posi-
tive ﬁrst and the negative second section of both sayings. If obedience enhances,
we should expect that disobedience diminishes. However, this conclusion is
avoided. The text not only introduces here the qualifying ‘as it were’, but it also
shifts at this point the consequences of human action from the divine to the
human side. The disobedient righteous abandon their creator, and the disobedient
Israelites must ﬂee. From having God himself deprived of his power, rabbinic
theology shrinks back.
   The following passage appears within an amoraic exegesis of Isa. 43.12. For-
mally, however, it deviates from the general pattern of this exegesis, and since,
furthermore, it is attributed to a tannaitic sage, we may assume that it is origi-
nally independent of the rest of the text:60
      And you are my witnesses, says the Lord, and I am God (Is. 43.12). R. Shimon ben
      Yohai taught: If you are my witnesses, says the Lord, I am God. And if you are not my
      witnesses, I am, as it were, not the Lord. (Pesiqta de-Rav Kahana 12.6, p. 208)

Between the propositions ‘you are my witnesses’ and ‘I am God’, the midrash
establishes a conditional relationship, whereby it transforms the assertive state-
ments of the Bible text into hypothetical ones. By explicitly facing also the possi-
bility of a non-fulﬁlment of the stated condition, it attains a theological boldness
which conspicuously exceeds the cautious train of thought we met in our previ-
ous example: Israel’s refusal to bear witness calls God’s divinity into question.
Nevertheless, the qualifying addition of ‘as it were’ is retained.
   The last example to be cited here is a piece of exegesis which draws on the
fact that, like other languages, Hebrew permits the use of expressions of locality
as designations of status and dependence in personal relations:
      R. Yohanan said: The wicked stand on their god(s) (Mhyhl) l( Nymyyqtm), as it says,
      Pharaoh dreamed that he was standing on the Nile (Gen. 41.1). But as to the right-
      eous, their God stands61 on them, as it says, And the Lord stood above him etc. (Gen
      28.13). (Gen. Rab. 69.3 par. 89.4, pp. 792–93 and 1090)



   60. In fact, it occurs in other contexts, too, as in Sifre Deut. 346 (pp. 403–404.): ‘Who builds his
upper chambers in the heavens and founds his vault upon the earth (Amos 9.6). R. Shimon ben
Yohai said: A parable of someone who took two ships and tied them to anchors and to iron bars and
placed them in the middle of the sea and built a palace upon them. As long as the ships are tied
together the palace subsists. If the ships drift asunder, the palace will not subsist. Thus, if the
Israelites do the will of the Maqom, he builds his upper chambers in the heavens. But if the Israel-
ites do not do his will, he founds, as it were, his vault upon the earth… Likewise, And you are my
witnesses, says the Lord, and I am God’, etc. The midrash includes similar exegeses of Exod. 15.2,
Deut. 32.3, Ps. 123.1 and Deut. 33.5.
   61. The singular Myyqtm, as in the broad majority of MSS, is to be preferred to the plural
Mymyyqtm or Nymyyqtm, which for 69.3 is attested by MS London, MS Rome and ed. Venice and
for 89.4 by MSS London and Paris, and which may be due to a simple copying error, although is
was adopted by Albeck.
70                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

This passage was adduced by I. Leibowitz as a pointed illustration of the dif-
ference between the piety of Judaism and the piety of non-Jews.62 Gentile piety,
as embodied by Pharaoh standing upon the Nile, essentially expects God to take
care of the (salvational) needs of his worshippers. Jewish piety, in contrast, is not
primarily concerned with the (salvational) gains to be derived from worshipping
God, but rather with the effort to be invested into worship. Giving to God is more
important than receiving from God, obedient action outbids its salviﬁc results.
If false piety relies on the sole agency of God, true worship must focus on the
agency of humankind.


                                         Conclusion
Our point of departure was the rabbinic awareness of a tension between God’s
call for obedience and Israel’s reaction to this call. As we saw, the reasons for
discrepancies between God’s demand and Israel’s behaviour were found, among
others, in a human evil inclination and in the strangeness or irrationality of the
precepts. On a more theoretical level, one could also speak of an authorization of
the individual to autonomous action.
    However, autonomous agency as an abstract human capacity was of com-
paratively little interest. Rabbinic haggadah rather indulges in an abundance of
images depicting an incessant interplay between God and Israel, the one aiming
at the other’s submission, and the other either yielding or resisting. The means to
overcome the tension include extrinsic devices such as retribution, an austere
deﬁnition of Israel’s obligation, the inherent force of the Torah and the com-
mandments, a creational afﬁnity between the commandments and the human
body, and even a paradoxical encouragement to avow one’s reluctance while
ﬁnding one’s obedience prompted by God’s fatherhood. Moreover, this interplay
aims not only at Israel’s salvation, but also at the power and reality of God.
God and Israel depend on each other mutually. Agency and recipiency unfold in
argument and reciprocity.
    In general, this interaction is clearly dialogical. God and his human coun-
terpart remain two neatly distinguishable personal subjects. The idea of an
absorption of human agency into the agency of God, as it was to be developed in
nineteenth-century Hasidism,63 is virtually absent from rabbinic literature. Mish-
nah Avot 2.4 may be a presentiment, but it is exceptional.




   62. J. Leibowitz, ‘Zur Zentralfrage: Wie verhält sich der Mensch zu Gott?’, in M. Stöhr (ed.),
Lernen in Jerusalem – Lernen mit Israel (Veröffentlichungen aus dem Institut Kirche und Judentum,
20; Berlin: Institut Kirche und Judentum, 1993), pp. 118–29 (pp. 121–22).
   63. Cf. Manekin, ‘Introduction’, p. 11.
                                           Chapter 5

   PAUL’S ANTHROPOLOGICAL ‘PESSIMISM’ IN ITS JEWISH CONTEXT

                                   Stephen Westerholm


‘Can mortals be righteous before God?’ (Job 4.17, NRSV). If God is the Lord who
loves righteousness and hates iniquity, then few questions can rival this one in
importance. Yet Jews and Christians, whose God is the Lord,1 have responded in a
variety of ways.
   For Timo Laato, the ‘greatest weakness in the argumentation’ of E. P. Sand-
ers’ Paul and Palestinian Judaism is its ‘inadequate coverage of the question of
the capacity of humankind’.2 Judaism sees human beings as possessing ‘free will’
(p. 67) and, with it, the capacity both to choose and to do good instead of evil.
‘Apparently everyone has an inborn propensity, but not hereditary compulsion
to disobedience. It is fully conceivable to the very end to be obedient to the
law’ (p. 73). Paul, however, thought Adam’s sin brought upon human beings
the ‘wretched state of calamity’ in which sin rules and humans ﬁnd themselves
unable to do, or even to choose, the good (p. 75). In short, ‘the anthropological
presuppositions of the Jewish and the Pauline patterns of religion clearly differ
from one another. The former is based on human free will, while the latter is
founded on human depravity’ (p. 146). In Sanders’ work, however, ‘the anthro-
pological approach to the respective religions is not sufﬁciently taken into
account’. This deﬁciency must be corrected if we are to ‘attain a convincing
explanation of the break between Paul and Judaism’ (p. 2).
   The distinction Laato proposes is sufﬁciently plausible to merit investigation.
Certainly writers on Judaism have long been anxious to distinguish their subject
from Christian notions of the ‘fall’ and ‘depravity’ of humankind.3 Sanders him-

   1. Indeed, if we follow Gabriele Boccaccini in deﬁning Judaism as ‘the monotheistic religion
of YHWH’, then Christianity itself ‘has never ceased to be a Judaism’ (Roots of Rabbinic Judaism:
An Intellectual History, from Ezekiel to Daniel [Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2002, p. 35]). The
deﬁnition captures important truths about the origin and nature of Christianity; actual usage of the
term ‘Judaism’, however – both ancient (see, e.g., Gal. 1.13, 14!) and modern – tends to be more
restrictive.
   2. Timo Laato, Paul and Judaism: An Anthropological Approach (Atlanta: Scholars Press,
1995), p. 62.
   3. E.g., Pinchas Lapide, in Pinchas Lapide and Peter Stuhlmacher, Paul: Rabbi and Apostle
(Minneapolis: Augsburg, 1984), pp. 44–47; Claude G. Monteﬁore, Judaism and St. Paul (London:
Goschen, 1914), p. 78; H. J. Schoeps, Paul: The Theology of the Apostle in the Light of Jewish
Religious History (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1961), pp. 187–88, 193–94.
72                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

self is among them. In discussing whether we may speak appropriately of Jewish
‘soteriology’, he notes that the term ‘may imply that all are in need of a salvation
which they do not possess, thus further implying a concept of original sin…
Since a concept of original or even universal sin is missing in most forms of
Judaism, such connotations would be unfortunate.’4 The stage would seem to be
set for a sharp distinction to be drawn between ‘most forms of Judaism’ and
Paul, whose ‘soteriology’ is routinely discussed without any of these qualms.
Later Sanders writes:
      It is important to note that the Rabbis did not have a doctrine of original sin or of the
      essential sinfulness of each man in the Christian sense. It is a matter of observation
      that all men sin. Men have, apparently, the inborn drive towards rebellion and disobe-
      dience. But this is not the same as being born in a state of sinfulness from which
      liberation is necessary. Sin comes only when man actually disobeys; if he were not to
      disobey he would not be a sinner. The possibility exists that one might not sin. Despite
      the tendency to disobey, man is free to obey or disobey. The lack of a doctrine of
      original sin in the Augustinian sense is an important point to be grasped if one is to
      understand Rabbinic ‘soteriology’ or the nature and quality of Jewish religious life.5

Here the position that Sanders opposes to that of ‘the rabbis’ – ‘a doctrine of
original sin or of the essential sinfulness of each man’; the notion that humans
are ‘born in a state of sinfulness from which liberation is necessary’ – is labeled
‘Christian’ and ‘Augustinian’. But the ‘Christian’ and ‘Augustinian’ position on
these matters derives from the writings of Paul. May we not, then, conclude that
‘the rabbis’ (and other Jews) differ signiﬁcantly from Paul on the sinfulness of
humankind?
   Yet further investigation remains in order. Sanders himself (as Laato notes)
does not focus on the issue. For his part, Laato apparently regards Jewish ‘opti-
mism’ (in contrast to Pauline ‘pessmism’) in this regard as too self-evident to
require extensive documentation;6 and the possibility of diversity within Juda-
ism (or, as some would have it, within the Judaisms) of the turn of the era is not
explored. A more broadly based comparison of the anthropology of Paul and
that of other Jews of his period seems very much in order. Is the apostle, in his
assessment of (untransformed)7 humanity’s capacity to do good, as pessimistic as
Laato proposes? If so (and certainly there are explicit statements in Paul’s letters
to support Laato’s point),8 to what does Paul attribute humanity’s moral impo-

   4. E. P. Sanders, Paul and Palestinian Judaism: A Comparison of Patterns of Religion (Phila-
delphia: Fortress Press, 1977), pp. 17–18.
   5. Sanders, Paul and Palestinian Judaism, pp. 114–15.
   6. After discussing for six pages the ‘anthropological presuppositions of the Jewish…pattern of
religion’, Laato concludes, ‘In summary it appears that free will in the domain of soteriology
among the Jews from Sirach until the Babylonian Talmud was opinio communis. A single (impor-
tant) exception conﬁrms the rule: the Qumran community seems to represent an absolute fatalism’
(Paul and Judaism, p. 72).
   7. Paul’s views of the possibility of Christian sin (or even of its inevitability, as Romans 7, on
one common understanding, implies) lie beyond the scope of this paper.
   8. Sanders grants the existence of such statements but disputes (on various grounds) their
importance to Paul’s thinking: they represent arguments Paul develops to support a point rather than
 WESTERHOLM Paul’s Anthropological ‘Pessimism’ in its Jewish Context 73

tence? By way of comparison, does the anthropological ‘optimism’ which Laato,
citing only a few (primarily rabbinic) texts, ﬁnds characteristic of Judaism in fact
dominate Jewish literature of the period?9 Is it everywhere assumed that there are
righteous people to be found, or are there texts that share Paul’s (pessimistic)
view that ‘there is none righteous’ (Rom. 3.10)?10 Should a similar pessimism
be attested, on what considerations is it grounded? One way or the other, the
comparison should serve to highlight distinctive features of Paul’s anthropology
and to contextualize what he shares with others.
    The project appears both eminently worthwhile and utterly unmanageable.
Only a beginning can be made here. In this paper Pauline anthropology itself will
be accorded only the most summary of treatments: I shall highlight a few theses
that I take to be true without the argumentation or documentation required of a
full-scale discussion.11 As for the writings of other Jews, to conﬁne our attention
to a few selected sources would leave unanswered (as Laato’s study, citing lim-
ited evidence, leaves unanswered) whether, or to what extent, Pauline ‘pessi-
mism’ has parallels in the literature of the period.12 What is needed is rather a
survey of the literature – in this case, the swiftest of surveys of the broadest


his settled convictions. Cf. my discussion in Israel’s Law and the Church’s Faith (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 1988), pp. 151–64.
    9. The survey below covers literature from the same period as that treated in Sanders’ Paul and
Palestinian Judaism: roughly speaking, from 200 BCE to 200 CE with the upper limit stretched
somewhat (as in Sanders’ work) to include tannaitic literature (here represented by Mekilta de-
Rabbi Ishmael). Treatment of literature clearly later than Paul seems warranted since my purposes
are not genealogical but heuristic. (In this respect, my approach here is closer to that of Alexander,
Barclay and Engberg-Pedersen [among other contributors to this symposium] than to that of Boc-
caccini.) The question here being asked of a variety of Jewish texts arises out of a reading of Paul;
it seems scarcely an issue in many of the texts themselves. This does not make it an illegitimate
question to raise; but Francis Watson’s paper rightly reminds us that different starting-points would
lead to very different emphases (see also Watson’s Paul and the Hermeneutics of Faith [London:
T&T Clark International, 2004], pp. 527–28).
    10. Though my inquiry is not unrelated to the issue of the origins of sin among human beings, it
is a different question. Even where human sin is traced to superhuman forces (e.g., humans are
believed to have been misled into sin by demonic powers), it need not follow that humans are
deemed incapable of doing good. Conversely, those who attribute human sinfulness to human
beings themselves may not think humanity now capable of doing good.
    11. Cf., however, my Perspectives Old and New on Paul: The ‘Lutheran’ Paul and His Critics
(Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2004).
    12. Like Laato, Mikael Winninge (Sinners and The Righteous: A Comparative Study of the
Psalms of Solomon and Paul’s Letters [ConBNT 26, Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell Inter-
national, 1995]) sees a fundamental difference between Paul’s understanding of human sinfulness
and the views of other Jews (e.g., ‘Paul simply claims that there are no righteous persons whatso-
ever, because all Jews and Gentiles are sinners from the outset. This is something entirely new
within Judaism. Paul’s Jewish contemporaries could agree that sinfulness was a universal problem,
but they would never concede that occasional sinful actions obliterated their covenantal status as
righteous’ [p. 264]; ‘whereas Paul’s Jewish contemporaries could admit that all human beings occa-
sionally committed sins, they would never have thought of classifying the basically faithful as
sinners’ [p. 306, contrasting what Paul writes in Romans 5]). Yet here the only non-Pauline text
studied is the Psalms of Solomon.
74                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

possible range of literature.13 The deﬁciencies inherent in rapid overviews14 will
be on bold display here: the social context, rhetorical purpose, and literary and
textual history of the sources we look at will all be ignored; nor is there place
here for subtlety or novelty in interpretation. Our limited purposes will be achieved
if, by the end, some sense emerges whether the distinctions commonly proposed
between Pauline anthropology and that of Judaism are warranted by the literature
of the period, and if attention has been drawn to individual Jewish writings that
would reward closer study on this issue.


                                     1. Pauline Theses
1. God requires of all human beings (Jews and Gentiles alike) that they do what
is good if they are to obtain life in the world to come; and God threatens with
judgment those who do evil.
   Like most Jews of his day, Paul thought that there are certain things that
people really ought to do (= ‘the good’) and other things that they really ought to
avoid (= what is ‘evil’). Like many Jews of his day, Paul claimed that God would
one day reward those who had done the good with eternal life while condemning
those who had done evil. He says so explicitly in Rom. 2.6–11; the thesis, more-
over, is implicit throughout Paul’s letters whenever he speaks of the judgment
(or ‘wrath’) to come and of the terror it holds for the sinful (1 Thess. 1.10; 5.2–9;
1 Cor. 5.13; 6.9–10; 11.32, etc.).
   2. The substance of the required ‘good’ is spelled out in the moral demands
of the Mosaic law. The ‘righteousness of the law’ is, for Paul, captured in the
dictum, ‘The one who does these things [= the demands spelled out in the law]
will live by them’.
   Again, Romans 2 is only the most obvious source of the ﬁrst part of our thesis.
Those who do what is good and are rewarded with life in 2.7, 10 are clearly
identiﬁed with the ‘doers of the law’ who are found to be ‘righteous’ before God
in 2.13. In the same chapter Paul goes on to say that Jews, who have been given
the law, are thereby able to instruct Gentiles in their mutual responsibility to
fulﬁl its (moral) commandments (2.17–23; see also v. 26). That the law spells
out the good required of all human beings is also implicit in 5.13 (deeds may be
[right or] wrong apart from the law, but the introduction of the law made what is
wrong in any case an indictable offence), 7.15–25 (the ‘I’ in question acknow-

   13. Some exclusions are, however, inevitable. The extent and nature of Paul’s distinctiveness
would certainly emerge more clearly if we were able to include the views of other Christian authors
from the period (many of whom, of course, were also Jews); for purposes of this paper, however,
our inquiry must be limited to the issue whether Jews who did not share Paul’s faith in Jesus as
Saviour and Christ nonetheless shared his anthropological pessimism. Philo’s work resists quick
summary here; see, however, the paper of John Barclay in this volume. Philip Alexander’s contri-
bution to this symposium may serve to justify the brevity of my treatment of the sectarian texts
from Qumran; on the other hand, their proximity to Paul’s position on the topic of this paper makes
their exclusion unthinkable. Josephus is here represented solely by Against Apion.
   14. After noting that a speed-reading course enabled him to read War and Peace in twenty
minutes, Woody Allen paused, then added: ‘It’s about Russia’.
 WESTERHOLM Paul’s Anthropological ‘Pessimism’ in its Jewish Context 75

ledges the goodness of what the law requires, though admitting an inability to do
it) and 13.8–10 (the law must be thought to spell out what it good, since the love
that fulﬁls it does no ‘evil’ to its neighbour).
    As we have seen, the claim in Rom. 2.13 that (not the hearers, but) the doers
of the law will be found righteous before God merely restates the declaration in
2.7, 10 that God will give life to those who do what is good. The same conviction
is said to be the operative principle of the ‘righteousness of the law’ in Rom. 10.5
(quoting Lev. 18.5): ‘the one who does these things [i.e., the requirements of the
law] will live by them’ (cf. Gal. 3.12). Pursuit of the ‘righteousness of the law’ is
attributed speciﬁcally, and naturally, to Jews, to whom the law was given (Rom.
9.31); the pre-Damascus Paul was among them (Phil. 3.6). But the righteousness
spelled out in God’s law and required of those to whom it was given is not in
principle different from the ‘good’ required of Jews and Gentiles alike (Rom. 2.7,
10).
    3. That Gentiles do not possess the written code of the law does not excuse
them from the requirement to do what is good.
    The general claim that Jew and Gentile (literally ‘Greek’) alike are required
to do the ‘good’ (Rom. 2.10) might seem to be restated in a way that applies
only to the former when Paul goes on to say that ‘the doers of the law will be
found righteous’ (2.13). Paul moves immediately to correct that impression:
Gentiles can rightly be expected to meet the same demands that Jews encounter
in the law since an awareness of those demands has been implanted in their
hearts (2.14–15). That Gentiles are indeed aware of the good that they ought to
do is demonstrated whenever they in fact do it (2.14; cf. 1.32).
    Such is the point of Rom. 2.14–16. The verses are sometimes taken as an
assertion by Paul that there are righteous Gentiles who (consistently) do what the
law requires; the question is then asked whether Christian or non-Christian
Gentiles are in mind. Those who think the latter are intended may then proceed
to accuse Paul of incoherence.15 The whole train of thought appears misguided,
however, once we recognize that Paul in these verses neither asserts nor assumes
that Gentiles can be found who consistently do what the law requires. His point is
that Gentiles and Jews are subject to the same standards of righteousness, though
Jews but not Gentiles possess the law in written form. He makes his point by
saying that Gentiles, too, are aware of the law’s requirements, though in a less
obvious way than that applicable to Jews: the ‘work of the law is written on their
hearts’. He substantiates the latter claim by saying that Gentiles show their aware-
ness of the good they are to do whenever they do it. Such a statement is not tan-
tamount to saying that there are Gentiles who consistently observe the law, nor
does Paul’s argument require the stronger claim; indeed, that Paul is not thinking
of people who consistently observe the law is made unmistakably clear when he
says of the same people who show their awareness of the law’s requirements

   15. Incoherence, in view of the depiction of universal guilt in Romans 1 and 3; so, most emphati-
cally, Heikki Räisänen, Paul and the Law (Tübingen: Mohr, 1983), pp. 101–109. Sanders, too, sees
Paul as inconsistent here, and believes that the inconsistency shows that (certain polemical passages
notwithstanding) universal sinfulness was not central to Paul’s thinking. See n. 8 above.
76                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

whenever they keep them (2.14) that their consciences and thoughts ‘accuse or
even excuse’ their behaviour (2.15, implying that the accusations rather than the
excusing are to be expected).
    4. That Jews have been granted great privileges by God does not exempt them
from the requirement to do what is good.
    Paul is as convinced as any Jew of the privileges God has granted to Israel
(Rom. 3.1–2; 9.4–5; 11.1). But (like many other Jews before and after him) he
insisted that such privileges do not exempt Abraham’s descendants from the
requirement to do what is good or from liability for judgment should they fail to
do so. One must be a ‘doer’, not a mere ‘hearer’, of the law (Rom. 2.13). Teach-
ing others what the law requires is no substitute for obeying it oneself (2.17–24).
    Paul underlines the point by declaring, in 2.25–29, that circumcision, though
itself a beneﬁt, means nothing if it is not accompanied by obedience to the law’s
(moral) demands; and, ultimately, it is only such obedience that matters. To rein-
force the point Paul lists three of the four relevant possibilities: a circumcised
person who keeps the law (his circumcision is of beneﬁt); a circumcised person
who transgresses the law (his circumcision is of no beneﬁt); an uncircumcised
person who keeps the law (his physical uncircumcision will be treated as the cir-
cumcision that beneﬁts). Each of the three scenarios underlines Paul’s point that
what is decisive is obedience to the law’s moral demands (i.e., doing what is
‘good’), not physical circumcision. (The fourth possibility, an uncircumcised
person who transgresses the law, adds nothing to the case and is omitted.)
    Again, in the context of this paper it is important to note what Paul says and
does not say in 2.25–29. The third of the scenarios he lists has often been
detached from its context and taken as a Pauline assertion (again, contradictory
of what Paul says elsewhere) that there are uncircumcised Gentiles who nonethe-
less keep the law. But vv. 26 and 27 no more assert that there are uncircumcised
people who keep the law than v. 25 asserts that some Jews observe its command-
ments while others do not. What is stated and reinforced throughout these verses
is the fundamental principle (a principle hardly peculiar to Paul) that (circum-
cised) Jews must themselves do what is right if they are to be approved by God;
obedience is what ultimately matters.
    5. Neither Jews nor Gentiles have done what they ought; hence, none can be
found ‘righteous’ before God by doing what the law requires.
    The point is made explicitly in Rom. 3.9–20, 23; and Rom. 1.18–32 pro-
nounces divine judgment on humankind (in general) for its ‘ungodliness and
unrighteousness’. And, again, it must be insisted that the point is implicit through-
out all Paul’s letters,16 representing the (negative) foundation of his mission:

   16. Phil. 3.6 has been thought to show that Paul did think righteous living a possibility. But the
claim in this verse that his own (pre-Damascus) behaviour was ‘blameless’ can only represent a
pre-Damascus perspective: in terms of the (now discredited) righteousness Paul’s behaviour was
perceived as unimpeachable; but from his present perspective Paul can hardly have regarded either
‘conﬁdence in the ﬂesh’ (3.3–4) or the persecution of the church (3.6) as ‘blameless’. Paul’s point
in the context is simply that the Philippians need not heed the claims of those who insist that the
righteousness of the law requires circumcision since Paul himself surpassed them all in the practice
of such righteousness – and he has now abandoned it for something far better.
 WESTERHOLM Paul’s Anthropological ‘Pessimism’ in its Jewish Context 77

apart from the deliverance God has provided through his Son, humanity is doomed
to a perdition warranted by its sins (1 Thess. 1.9–10; 1 Cor. 1.18; 2 Cor. 2.15–16,
etc.). ‘There is none righteous’ (Rom. 3.10).
    6. Indeed, humankind (= the ‘ﬂesh’) does not, and cannot, submit to God’s law.
    Such is the thrust of Rom. 5.12–8.8. Through Adam’s disobedience, all human
beings have been made ‘sinners’ (5.19). They now ‘live in sin’ (6.1–11). They
are sin’s ‘slaves’ (6.16–23). Nothing good lives in the ‘ﬂesh’; it cannot do the
good it acknowledges in the law (7.15–25). The mindset of the ﬂesh is one of
hostility toward God; it neither does nor can submit to God’s law. Those in the
ﬂesh cannot please God (8.7–8).
    The depiction of human beings as universally guilty of concrete sins in
Romans 1–3 has at times been contrasted with the portrayal of their dilemma in
Romans 5–7 as ‘slaves’ of sin. Only Romans 5–7 is thought to portray human
beings as incapable of doing good, though it is allowed that Romans 1–3 says
that all in fact do what is evil. But perhaps the distinction has been overdrawn.
After all, Romans 1–3 speaks of the concrete sins that humans commit as illus-
trative of the ‘ungodliness and unrighteousness’ that prevail among human
beings (1.18).17 Human sin has led to a situation in which humans are incorrigi-
bly sinful: their thoughts have been reduced to futility, their uncomprehending
heart has been darkened, they have become foolish, they have been left the
hopeless prey of their passions (1.21–24). That humans universally commit sin
is thus a reﬂection of the universal corruption of human nature: all are ‘under sin’
(3.9). Romans 1 and 3 seem hardly more optimistic than Romans 5–7 about the
human potential for good. And once Romans 2 is correctly construed as insisting
that the same requirement to do what is good applies to Gentiles (though they do
not have the law) and Jews (possession of the law and of circumcision does not
exempt them from the need for obedience) alike, it will not be thought contradic-
tory of what Paul says elsewhere in Romans.
    7. Because the sinfulness of Adamic humanity embraces Jews as well as Gen-
tiles, the Sinaitic covenant is in fact a covenant of ‘condemnation’ and ‘death’.
    Religious Jews of Paul’s day commonly saw God’s covenant with Israel –
embracing both God’s promises to Abraham and Israel’s commitment at Mount
Sinai to observe God’s laws – as the framework within which life was to be lived
and God’s favour enjoyed. For Paul, God’s promises to Abraham remain in
place – indeed, they ﬁnd fulﬁlment now in the community of Christ-believing
Jews and Gentiles (Gal. 3.7–8, 14, 29; Rom. 4.13–16) and will ﬁnd fulﬁlment at
the eschaton in the salvation of ‘all Israel’ (Rom. 11.25–32). But the Sinaitic
covenant, which promises life to those who observe its commandments (Rom.
7.10; 10.5; Gal. 3.12) while cursing its transgressors (Gal. 3.10, 13; cf. 4.5), has
become a covenant of ‘enslavement’ (Gal. 4.24), ‘condemnation’ and ‘death’
(2 Cor. 3.7, 9): its only operative sanction is its curse (Gal. 3.10) – inevitably,
inasmuch as all are ‘under sin’ (Gal. 3.22).

   17. In his contribution to this volume, Simon Gathercole notes that humanity in Romans 1 is
guilty of the ‘meta-sin’ of ‘suppressing’ the truth or ‘exchanging’ it (‘for worthless idols’); the ‘meta-
sin of suppression or exchange then issues in a cascade of sins plural’.
78                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   The salviﬁc institutions of Israel do not, for Paul, bring salvation to sinners18
(or ‘life’ to the ‘dead’; cf. Gal. 3.21); and since the ‘whole world’ (including,
explicitly, those ‘under the law’) stands ‘guilty before God’, no ‘ﬂesh’ can be
found righteous by ‘the works of the law’ (Rom. 3.19–20). ‘Judaism’ for Paul
means the pursuit of the ‘righteousness of the law’, and Paul was himself once its
zealous advocate (Gal. 1.13–14; Phil. 3.2–9; Rom. 9.31–10.5); now, however, he
speaks of his life in ‘Judaism’ as a matter of the past (Gal. 1.13), of his pursuit of
righteousness through the law as an abandoned quest (Phil. 3.7–9). Justiﬁcation
of the ‘ungodly’ requires new and extraordinary measures.
   8. The ‘righteousness of faith’ is the emergency measure that God has intro-
duced for the ‘salvation’ of sinful human beings. ‘Sinners’ (who, by deﬁnition,
have not done what God requires of them) can only receive it, in faith, as a gift of
divine grace.
   Because human beings do not, and cannot, show the righteous behaviour that
God requires of all (Jews and Gentiles alike), God has intervened to provide
a means by which ‘sinners’ (Jews and Gentiles alike) can be found ‘righteous’.
Paul could hardly signal more clearly than he does the extraordinary and para-
doxical nature of the ‘righteousness’ that God now offers the unrighteous. Those
‘declared righteous by [God’s] grace as a gift’ in Rom. 3.24 are precisely those
who have ‘sinned’ and ‘fall[en] short of the glory of God’ in 3.23. Those declared
righteous in 4.5 are the ‘ungodly’; similarly, those declared righteous in 5.9 are
the ‘ungodly’ of v. 6, the ‘sinners’ of v. 8, the ‘enemies’ of God of v. 10. The
‘many’ who are ‘made righteous’ by Christ’s obedience in 5.19 are the same
‘many’ who were ‘made sinners’ by Adam’s obedience. They are the recipients
of an ‘abundance of grace and the free gift of righteousness’ (5.17). The gracious
offer of righteousness to those who have faith is the substance of the message
now being proclaimed in the gospel Paul preaches (1.16–17); inasmuch as the
gospel brings ‘salvation’ (1.16), it represents the divine response to the crisis
brought on by human sin (1.18–3.20).
   If ‘sinners’ are to be found ‘righteous’, it can only be the result of a ‘free gift’
(Rom. 5.17; cf. 3.23–24). If the ‘ungodly’ are to be declared ‘righteous’, it must
be ‘without’ the (righteous) works on which such a declaration would normally
be based (4.5).19 The ‘righteousness’ of those whose sins are forgiven is one
with which they have been credited ‘apart from [righteous] works’ (4.6). The
righteousness of faith necessarily operates apart from any consideration of the
deeds of its recipients inasmuch as they – the ungodly, sinners, those needing
forgiveness – have no righteous deeds to offer. Paul’s emphasis on the gratuity of
salvation in Christ mirrors his depiction of human bondage to sin.20

    18. Most Jews would agree, if by ‘sinners’ we mean incorrigible (unrepentant) sinners. Paul, who
thought humankind in bondage to sin and unwilling to submit to God’s law, would (in effect) place
all human beings in that category (cf. Rom. 5.8, 19). Cf. Winninge, Sinners and the Righteous, p. 182.
    19. Moreover (as J. Louis Martyn repeatedly reminded us in symposium discussions), the
message of the cross must itself create the possibility of faith in its listeners, and make of them new
moral agents.
    20. The theme of grace in Paul is explored more fully, and illuminated by a comparison with
Philo, in John Barclay’s contribution to this volume.
 WESTERHOLM Paul’s Anthropological ‘Pessimism’ in its Jewish Context 79

   9. Unredeemed humanity is also in bondage to demonic forces.
   To this point, the only explanation we have seen Paul give of humanity’s
incapacity to do good is the corruption of human nature – a corruption for which
human sin is itself responsible. There is, however, another dimension to the
human dilemma.
   According to Gal. 4.8–9, should Galatian believers became circumcised, they
would thereby revert to the service of ‘those who by nature are not gods’, the
‘weak and beggarly elements’ to which (to whom?) they were once enslaved.
Clearly redemption in Christ entails deliverance from the rule of demonic forces;
indeed, for William Wrede, such redemption was at the heart of the Pauline
gospel (cf. also 2 Cor. 4.4).21
   Wrede’s claim at least seems doubtful. If 1 Thessalonians reﬂects the mes-
sage of salvation that Paul proclaimed to the Macedonian community, nothing
was said of slavery to powers of evil: God’s wrath was the danger to be avoided
(1.10; 2.16; 4.6; 5.2–3, 9). The same is true, to judge by Paul’s letters, of his
message to the Corinthians and Philippians (see, e.g., 1 Cor. 5.13; 11.32; Phil.
1.28). Galatians, too, sees in the gospel God’s mode of declaring sinners right-
eous (2.15–17, 21; 3.6–9, 22) and redeeming those who have transgressed the
law from its curse (3.10, 13; 4.5). Romans 5–7 has often been interpreted as
speaking, not simply of the incorrigible sinfulness of humankind, but of their
slavery to the demonic power of ‘Sin’. Certainly Paul speaks here of ‘Sin’
entering and ruling the world, and of people as Sin’s ‘slaves’. Yet each refer-
ence that might tempt one to think of ‘Sin’ as a demonic force is surrounded by
others that militate against the notion. That Sin ‘entered the world’ through
Adam’s misdeed might conceivably be a reference to the gaining by a demonic
force of a foothold in human affairs (5.12). But Paul goes on immediately to
say that ‘Sin’ is not ‘counted’ (i.e., it is not indictable) apart from law: the refer-
ence must be to human misdeeds. The ‘Sin’ that ‘rules’ through death in 5.21
is counterbalanced by ‘Grace’ that rules in righteousness – and since the rule
of ‘Grace’ involves personiﬁcation, there is no reason to think differently of
the rule of ‘Sin’.22 People may be ‘slaves’ of ‘Sin’ in Romans 6, but the same
slavery is spoken of as a slavery to ‘uncleanness’ and ‘lawlessness’, and it is
opposed to slavery to ‘obedience’ and ‘righteousness’ (6.16–23): personiﬁ-
cations of patterns of life, not supernatural forces, are in view. In short, though
Paul undoubtedly believed in demonic forces and thought unredeemed
humanity is in some sense subject to their power, he does not typically attrib-
ute human sinfulness to, or portray redemption as deliverance from, the power
of demons.23



   21. William Wrede, Paul (English trans. Edward Lummis; Lexington, KY: American Library
Association Committee on Reprinting, 1962).
   22. Note too that the ‘sin’ that, in the immediately preceding verse, is said to have ‘increased’ is
parallel to the ‘trespass’ that ‘multiplied’ (5.20).
   23. For more detail, see ch. 18 of my Perspectives Old and New on Paul.
80                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   10. Paul’s anthropological ‘pessimism’ seems a consequence of his Christian
conviction that ‘Christ died for our sins’.24 It is not to be attributed to the type of
‘Judaism’ in which he was raised.
   As we have seen, the post-Damascus Paul thought the salviﬁc institutions of
Judaism inadequate to cope with the problem of human sin; but – to judge by
Paul’s letters themselves – the analysis (and with it, Paul’s anthropological
‘pessimism’) seems clearly a product of post-Damascus thinking.25 His refer-
ences to his former progress in ‘Judaism’ and zeal for its traditions (Gal. 1.14;
Phil. 3.4–6) make it unlikely that, before Damascus, he had harboured deep-
seated doubts about its viability. Things looked very different, however, once
Paul was convinced that the cruciﬁxion and resurrection of God’s Son were nec-
essary for the salvation of humankind: here was a divine initiative quite outside
the framework of the Sinaitic covenant; as such, it called both for a reconsidera-
tion of the divine purpose of that covenant26 and for a more radical assessment of
the human dilemma.27
   It follows that, whatever analogies to Paul’s anthropological ‘pessimism’ we
may ﬁnd in non-Christian Jewish texts, it would be wrong to seek in Paul’s own
pre-Christian experience of Judaism the source of his pessimism. Several schol-
ars of an earlier day28 suggested that it derived from the Hellenistic Judaism in
which Paul was raised, which had (apparently) deteriorated considerably from
the purer strands of Palestine. It seems doubtful that Hellenistic Judaism can be
so distinguished from Palestinian;29 if, moreover, Phil. 3.6 represents Paul’s pre-
Damascus assessment of his behaviour, then he must have once thought that
some Jews at least (among whom he did not hesitate to include himself) had done
quite well in measuring up to the law’s requirements. The same evidence for pre-
Damascus optimism would seem to rule out the suggestion that the pre-Damascus

    24. Here I am of course agreeing with Sanders’ thesis that, for Paul, the solution preceded the
plight. (As Louis Martyn pointedly reminded us at the symposium, this was Barth’s position as well!)
    25. That Paul’s post-Damascus thinking (including its ‘anthropological pessimism’) reﬂects his
(re)reading of Israel’s Scriptures is the important emphasis of Watson’s Paul and the Hermeneutics
of Faith: ‘Christ and scripture reciprocally interpret one another… For Paul, the light of the risen
Christ is at the same time the illumination of scripture, a scripture reordered so as to form the inter-
pretative matrix within which the Christ-event takes shape and discloses itself as the particular
event it is’ (p. 529; cf. also pp. 190–91, 310).
    26. Since Paul continued to believe that the Sinaitic covenant and law were divinely instituted
(and therefore ‘glorious’ [2 Cor. 3.7–11]), they could only be deemed ‘inadequate’ if called upon to
perform a task they were not intended to fulﬁl. The purpose of the law itself needed to be rethought
in light of God’s redemption in Christ. Paul’s reﬂections on the subject lie outside the scope of this
paper, however.
    27. With this in mind, the phrase ‘Pauline pessimism’ must itself be seen as misleading. Paul
does not appear to have entertained negative views of human moral capacities apart from the
buoyant, more-than-offsetting conviction that God, in Jesus Christ, had intervened graciously and
dramatically to provide for human salvation.
    28. E.g., Monteﬁore, Judaism and St. Paul; Samuel Sandmel, The Genius of Paul (Philadelphia:
Fortress Press, 1979).
    29. Here the obligatory reference is of course to Martin Hengel’s Judaism and Hellenism:
Studies in their Encounter in Palestine during the Early Hellenistic Period (English trans. John
Bowden; Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1974).
 WESTERHOLM Paul’s Anthropological ‘Pessimism’ in its Jewish Context 81

Paul shared with apocalyptic Judaism a sense that human beings are the hopeless
victims of superhuman powers of evil; nor do such powers ﬁgure sufﬁciently in
Paul’s post-Damascus depictions of human sinfulness30 and redemption31 to
suggest that his thinking was grounded and remained within the horizons of
(such)32 apocalyptic circles. In short, though a comparison of Paul’s ‘pessimism’
with the anthropology found within the many branches of Judaism at the turn of
the era should prove illuminating, no direct route from the latter to the former is
to be presupposed.


                   2. Human Moral Capacities in Jewish Writings
Paul thought that human beings – in Adam, or in the ‘ﬂesh’ – are incapable of
showing the righteousness that God requires of them; hence ‘righteousness’ must
be given them as a gift. We turn now to Jewish literature of the period between
(roughly) 200 BCE and 200 CE. Much of Judaism of the period can properly be
described as Torah-centric. The question we put to these sources can thus usually
be stated in terms of Torah’s fulﬁlment: Is Israel’s observance of Torah thought,
in principle, to be unproblematic, or are reasons suggested why the observance of
God’s commands is difﬁcult (or even impossible) for some, or most, or even all
Jews? Occasionally, where the identiﬁcation of righteous or wise behaviour with
conduct conforming to the Mosaic law is not explicit, we must be content with

    30. Though human beings are said to be incorrigibly sinful in both Romans 1–3 and Romans 5–
7, in neither passage is human sinfulness attributed to the inﬂuence of superhuman forces; still less
are humans the innocent victims of such forces. In Romans 1, human sinfulness is rooted in the
(inexcusable; see 1.20; also 1.32) refusal of humans who ‘knew God’ to ‘honour him as God’ or
‘give thanks to him’ (1.21); moreover, as Simon Gathercole notes in his paper, the ‘dominating
power’ into whose hands God places sinful human beings is here ‘their own desires’. Romans 5 is
explicit in claiming that ‘sin came into the world though one man’ (5.12; on what I take to be the
personiﬁcation of ‘sin’ in the verse, see the discussion in point 9 above; but even if we take the verse
to be speaking of Sin as a superhuman power, its ‘entrance’ into the world of human beings is said
to be dependent on a concrete act of human disobedience) and that it was ‘by one man’s disobe-
dience’ that ‘the many were made sinners’ (5.19). Yet humans so corrupted are incapable of pleasing
God (8.7–8). Conspicuously absent from Paul’s writings are (‘Enochic’) notions of human sinful-
ness as the result of the intermarriage of angelic and human beings (thus transgressing creation’s
boundaries) or of the revelation of mysteries to human beings by (fallen) angels.
    31. See the discussion in point 9 above.
    32. ‘Apocalyptic’ is of course a slippery term; many themes so designated in the scholarly
literature are abundantly attested in Paul’s writings. What is denied here is simply that Paul’s
pessimistic anthropology has its roots in a branch of Judaism that is thought to portray human
beings as the hopeless victims of superhuman powers of evil. Note that such an understanding of
the human dilemma makes very problematic the covenantal theology that assigns blessings to those
who obey God’s law (cf. Gabriele Boccaccini, Middle Judaism: Jewish Thought, 300 BCE to 200 CE
[Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1991], p. 133). The pre-Damascus Paul, on the other hand, seems to
have been committed to just such a theology: he was ‘zealous’ in keeping the ‘traditions’ of his
ancestors, and deemed himself ‘blameless’ in his pursuit of the ‘righteousness of the law’ (Gal. 1.14;
Phil. 3.6). Similarly, the Jews of whom he speaks were committed to the ‘righteousness that is based
on law’ (Rom. 9.31; 10.3–5). To use Boccaccini’s terms, ‘Judaism’ as Paul knew it was clearly
‘proto-rabbinic’, not ‘Enochic’. See also n. 49 below.
82                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

what the text says about the human potential for virtue in general. Since the
possibility of Gentile righteousness is seldom a focus in these texts, comments on
that subject will be few.33
    Since the purpose of this survey is heuristic rather than genealogical,34 I make
no attempt to arrange texts in chronological order, nor do I comment on issues of
dating where they are in dispute. Given that the survey is exploratory in nature, it
is important that results not be prejudiced by notions of what we may expect to
ﬁnd in literature of a certain sort (‘wisdom literature’, for example, or ‘apocalyp-
tic’) or by the assumption that texts related in other respects will treat our topic
similarly. Hence our inquiry – whether humans are deemed capable of doing good;
whether righteous people are to be found – will be put afresh to each text, and the
order in which texts are taken up for discussion will be deliberately arbitrary.35
    1. That humans have the choice to do good or evil is stressed in at least three
different contexts in Mekilta de-Rabbi Ishmael:36 Adam, faced with the need to
choose between ‘the way of life and the way of death’, opted for the latter
(Beshallah 7 [Lauterbach 1.248], on Exod. 14.29); all nations had the opportu-
nity at Sinai to accept or reject the Torah, though only Israel chose to accept it
(Bahodesh 1 [Lauterbach 2.198–200], on 19.2; Bahodesh 5–6 [Lauterbach
2.234–38], on 20.2–3); the same choice must be made by the individual as well.37
      If one wishes to hearken, he is immediately given the opportunity to hearken. If one
      wishes to forget, he is immediately led to forget. And [Simon b. Azzai] also used to
      say: Once a man desires to hearken of his own will, he is led to hearken both when it is
      his will to do so and even when it is not his will. And if it be his will to forget, he will
      be led to forget even when it is not his will. Freedom of choice is given. (Vayassa‘ 1
      [Lauterbach 2.97], on 15.26)

Frequent statements throughout Mekilta mention particular rewards given by God
in response to particular deeds (‘for one cannot obtain rewards except for deeds’
[Pisha 5 (Lauterbach 1.34), on 12.6; so Pisha 11 (Lauterbach 1.87), on 12.23;
Pisha 16 (Lauterbach 140–41), on 13.4, etc.]). It should not be concluded that
divine judgment was thought to proceed on a strict measure-for-measure basis;
but it certainly does follow that people were thought capable of acting in God-
pleasing ways.38


   33. It will quickly become apparent that in many texts the possibility of doing good (by Jews, at
least) seems self-evident. At the risk of repetition, I have included a number of such texts: to pass
them over and highlight possible exceptions to the rule would inevitably distort the picture.
   34. See n. 9 above.
   35. Rabbinic literature (here represented by Mekilta de-Rabbi Ishmael) will be treated ﬁrst,
followed by Josephus (Against Apion), the books of the (Old Testament) ‘Apocrypha’ (in the order
in which they appear in the NRSV) and Pseudepigrapha (in the order in which they appear in
Charlesworth’s edition), and the sectarian literature from Qumran.
   36. Quotations from this text are taken from the three-volume edition edited and translated by
Jacob Z. Lauterbach (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1976 [1933]).
   37. In his contribution to this volume, Gabriele Boccaccini notes that the rabbis did not share
‘Enochic’ ideas of the superhuman nature of evil.
   38. Note as well, among other contributions to this volume, Philip Alexander’s summary
treatment of the rabbinic doctrine of the two inclinations and of its implicit acknowledgement of
 WESTERHOLM Paul’s Anthropological ‘Pessimism’ in its Jewish Context 83

   2. Much of Josephus’s Against Apion is devoted to praise of the laws of
Moses, the divinely guided lawgiver of the Jews (2.184). But good laws that are
beyond the capacity of their subjects to fulﬁl are of little use (cf. 2.220–24), so
Josephus emphasizes as well the importance Jews place on observing their laws
(1.42, 60, 190–92), the willingness of all to do so, and their unparalleled success
– throughout their history – in maintaining obedience (2.82, 150, 156, 228): ‘a
transgressor is a rarity’ (2.178).39 For our limited purposes we need draw no fur-
ther conclusions from these extraordinary statements than that Josephus evinces
no suspicion that humans are unable to obey God’s law.
   3. Though Tobit’s40 kindred and tribe had proved faithless from the time of
Jeroboam (Tob. 1.4–5), and though, even in exile, they ate the food of the
Gentiles (1.10), Tobit himself ‘walked in the ways of truth and righteousness all
the days of [his] life’ (1.3) – and he was not alone (5.14; 9.6; cf. 3.14). The text
distinguishes between such ‘righteous’ (though not sinless; cf. 3.3) people and
‘sinners’ (4.17; 13.6, 9): both encounter, in this life,41 fates suited to their deeds
(4.5–19; 12.6–10). The exhortations that our author seizes every opportunity to
convey assume throughout that it is possible to do what is right, to avoid sin, and
to please God by so doing:
      Revere the Lord all your days, my son, and refuse to sin or to transgress his com-
      mandments. Live uprightly all the days of your life, and do not walk in the ways of
      wrongdoing; for those who act in accordance with truth will prosper in all their activi-
      ties. (4.5–6)
      Do good and evil will not overtake you. (12.7)
      So now, my children, I command you, serve God faithfully and do what is pleasing in
      his sight. (14.8)

Even Gentiles, though now lacking in understanding and deceived by their idols,
will one day ‘all be converted and worship God in truth’ (14.6; cf. 4.19; 13.11).
Israelites who are alive in that day (as in Tobit’s own day) will meet different
fates, depending on their actions:
      All the Israelites who are saved in those days and are truly mindful of God will be
      gathered together; they will go to Jerusalem and live in safety forever in the land of
      Abraham, and it will be given over to them. Those who sincerely love God will rejoice,
      but those who commit sin and injustice will vanish from all the earth. (14.7)

Nothing in Tobit suggests that obedience that satisﬁes God is beyond human
achieving.

human freedom of choice and Friedrich Avemarie’s discussion of the evil inclination and human
capacities to resist it.
   39. Cf. the even more extravagant claim in Ant. 3.223: ‘Those laws, excellent beyond the
standard of human wisdom, have been in every age rigidly observed, insomuch that neither in
peace, through luxury, nor in war, under constraint, have Hebrews transgressed any one of them’.
(Translations from Josephus are taken from the Loeb edition, by H. St. J. Thackeray.)
   40. In what follows, quotations from the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical books are taken from the
NRSV.
   41. Resurrection is not envisaged in Tobit. Tobit is content if some of his descendants survive to
see the day of Jerusalem’s glory (13.16).
84                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   4. In Judith, the God of Israel is ‘the God who hates iniquity’ (Jdt. 5.17).
When Israel sins, it can anticipate disaster; but no harm can befall the people
when they have not sinned against their God (5.17–21; 11.10). The latter is held
out as a real possibility (cf. 5.19, 21; 8.20), Judith herself is seen as a virtuous
woman (8.8, 31; 13.20), and even the Ammonite Achior does what is right in
coming to faith in Israel’s God (14.10).
   5. In the Wisdom of Solomon, the doing of good or evil is ostensibly at the
discretion of all human beings. The book opens with an invitation to the ‘rulers
of the earth’ (and thus to Gentiles) to ‘love righteousness’ and to seek the Lord
‘because he is found by those who do not put him to the test’ (1.1–2). Later
‘monarchs’ are addressed in order that they ‘may learn wisdom and not trans-
gress’ (6.9). Wisdom is found by those who seek her (6.12); ‘therefore if you
delight in thrones and scepters, O monarchs over the peoples, honor wisdom, so
that you may reign forever’ (6.21).
   Solomon himself, though born no different from other human beings (7.1–6),
recognized that, apart from wisdom, humans are weak and lacking in understand-
ing (9.5); only if guided by Wisdom can they learn what pleases God and do
deeds that God ﬁnds acceptable (9.10–12). Furthermore he had the insight to
realize that only God can give wisdom; in answer to his prayers, then, he was
given Wisdom and ‘all good things…along with her’ (7.7–11; 8.21–9.18). Simi-
larly, the righteous of every age have been steered by Wisdom (9.17–18; 10.1, 4–
6, 10, etc.). The righteous nation of Israel (10.15; 15.2–4) – whose history has
never been more benignly told: not even the wilderness generation departed from
wisdom (10.15–11.14)! – has repeatedly experienced the guidance and deliver-
ance of divine Wisdom.
   The path of Wisdom, though accessible to all who seek her, has not been pur-
sued by all, however; and though God loves all his creatures and provides even
the most incorrigible sinners with every opportunity to repent (11.23–24; 12.2–
27), all will in the end be judged for their deeds (1.8; 3.10; 5.15, etc.). Immortality
will be the lot of the righteous, even if their earthly life should end prematurely
(3.1–9; 4.7–9, 16; 5.15); on the other hand, ‘those who have not heeded the
warning of mild rebukes will experience the deserved judgment of God’ (12.26).
   Does the Wisdom of Solomon contain any hints that there are circumstances
beyond the control of the ungodly that keep them from doing what is right?
According to 2.23–24, it was through the ‘devil’s envy’ that death entered the
world. Genesis 3 is presumably in mind; but the reference hardly sufﬁces to
acquit Adam and Eve of guilt for their actions, and the devil is not mentioned as
a factor in later sins. Idolatry is portrayed as the source of all evil (14.12, 27), and
various suggestions are made about its origins, some seeming quite innocent
(13.6–7; 14.15–21); but in the end our author refuses to see idolaters as blameless
(11.15; 13.8–9; 14.30–31).42 At one point, however, our author does suggest that
the Canaanites whom the Israelites displaced were so innately sinful that any
change of their ways was inconceivable:

   42. Cf. John M. G. Barclay, Jews in the Mediterranean Diaspora (Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1996), pp. 186–87.
 WESTERHOLM Paul’s Anthropological ‘Pessimism’ in its Jewish Context 85

      But judging them little by little you gave them an opportunity to repent, though you
      were not unaware that their origin was evil and their wickedness inborn, and that their
      way of thinking would never change. For they were an accursed race from the begin-
      ning. (12.10–11)

Here the curse placed upon Canaan in Gen. 9.25 is perhaps thought to have
predetermined the moral character of his descendants (cf. 3.12–13). Even in that
case, however, they would still be suffering for the concrete sin of their ancestor;
and the context as a whole is intended to stress that God is so indulgent to sinners
that their postponed punishment is richly deserved.
    6. At no point in the literature is the human capacity to do good more explic-
itly afﬁrmed than in Sirach 15:
      Do not say, ‘It was the Lord’s doing that I fell away’; for he does not do what he hates.
      Do not say, ‘It was he who led me astray’; for he has no need of the sinful…
      It was [the Lord] who created humankind in the beginning, and he left them in the
           power of their own free choice.
      If you choose, you can keep the commandments, and to act faithfully is a matter of
           your own choice.
      He has placed before you ﬁre and water; stretch out your hand for whichever you
           choose.
      Before each person are life and death, and whichever one chooses will be given …
      He has not commanded anyone to be wicked, and he has not given anyone permission
           to sin. (15.11–20)43

Consistent with this perspective are any number of texts that treat the doing of
what is good and right as a matter of course – or at least of one or two easy steps
– for all who are so inclined:
      If you are willing, my child, you can be disciplined,
      and if you apply yourself you will become clever.
      If you love to listen you will gain knowledge,
      and if you pay attention you will become wise. (6.32–33)

      Do no evil, and evil will never overtake you.
      Stay away from wrong, and it will turn away from you. (7.1–2)

      In all you do, remember the end of your life,
      and then you will never sin. (7.36)

  God, of course, judges people by their deeds (16.12–14; 35.24). Those who do
what is right please the Lord and may anticipate his blessing (2.8; 11.22; 35.5).44

   43. The text alludes to Deut. 30.19. In both texts, ‘“life” and “death” represent the two opposing
human destinies… There are two respective ways to those two destinies, keeping the com-
mandments or transgressing them; and the way that we take is a matter of our own choice, not of
fate’ (Watson, Paul and the Hermeneutics of Faith, pp. 11–12).
   44. Indeed, Boccaccini (Middle Judaism, p. 105) sees in Sir. 21.27 (which he renders: ‘When an
impious man curses the satan, he really curses his own soul’) a radical demythologization of satan,
‘the angelic being depicted in the Book of the Watchers as guilty of the corruption of the world and
therefore responsible for evil’. The NRSV rendering of the verse, however, takes it to refer to a
human adversary (i.e., the curse one utters against an adversary recoils on oneself); so also Patrick
W. Skehan and Alexander A. Di Lella, The Wisdom of Ben Sira: A New Translation with Notes
(AB 39; New York: Doubleday, 1987), pp. 311–12.
86                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   Still, this straightforward picture is not the whole story, even in Sirach. Even
the righteous – Sirach allows – commit sins, at times without knowing it (19.16);
indeed, ‘we all deserve punishment’ (8.5) and need forgiveness (28.2, 4). All face
temptation, and prayers that one will not be overcome by evil are very much in
order (23.4–6; cf. 37.15). A review of history shows that the righteous have often
been a distinct minority (44.17; 48.15; 49.4). One can even regret that human
beings were created with an inclination to evil (37.3). And though our author
insists that humans are free to choose good or evil, his conviction that God is the
creator of all leads him elsewhere to say that good and evil, life and death, sin-
ners and the godly are all among the ‘pairs’ created by God (33.10–15; cf.
42.24).45 Nonetheless, for Ben Sira himself, none of these considerations seems
to have called into question the human capacity for doing good.46
   7. Baruch echoes the Jewish scriptures in lamenting Israel’s inveterate dis-
obedience:
      From the time when the Lord brought our ancestors out of the land of Egypt until
      today, we have been disobedient to the Lord our God, and we have been negligent, in
      not heeding his voice … We did not listen to the voice of the Lord our God in all the
      words of the prophets whom he sent to us, but all of us followed the intent of our own
      wicked hearts by serving other gods and doing what is evil in the sight of the Lord our
      God. (Bar. 1.19–22)

Scripture is echoed as well in the assurance that God will one day give his people
‘a heart that obeys and ears that hear’, so that they will ‘turn from their stub-
bornness and their wicked deeds’ (2.31–32; cf. 3.7). But neither Israel’s habit-
ual disobedience nor the conviction that the propensity for sin will one day be
overcome by divine intervention means that, today, obedience is beyond human
attainment:
      [The way to knowledge] is the book of the commandments of God,
      the law that endures forever.
      All who hold her fast will live,
      and those who forsake her will die. (4.1)

   8. The books of Maccabees are dominated by stories of how loyalty to God
and to his laws cost many people their lives; but clearly such faithfulness – and
righteous behaviour in general – is thought within human capacities. Indeed,
the author of 4 Maccabees never tires of repeating the thesis that reason is able

   45. David Winston (The Wisdom of Solomon: A New Translation with Introduction and
Commentary [AB 43; Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1979], pp. 46–58) discusses the juxtaposition
of ‘freedom and determinism’ in Sirach and other Jewish texts, remarking, ‘What bafﬂes the reader
of this ancient literature, however, is the easy coexistence in it of two apparently contradictory
strands of thought, namely, an emphasis on God’s ultimate determination of all human action
coupled with an equally emphatic conviction that the human will is the arbiter of its own moral
destiny’ (p. 48). See also E. P. Sanders, Paul and Palestinian Judaism, pp. 257–70, 446–47.
   46. Cf. Skehan and Di Lella, The Wisdom of Ben Sira, pp. 82–83; also Donald E. Gowan,
‘Wisdom’, in D. A. Carson, Peter T. O’Brien and Mark A. Seifrid (eds.), Justiﬁcation and Variegated
Nomism. vol. 1: The Complexities of Second Temple Judaism (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2001), pp.
215–39 (216–17).
 WESTERHOLM Paul’s Anthropological ‘Pessimism’ in its Jewish Context 87

to subdue the passions (at least when it is instructed by God’s law; cf. 1.1, 3, 5,
7, 9, etc., etc.).47
    9. In the one extensive passage in 1 Esdras lacking a parallel in the canonical
Jewish scriptures, Zerubbabel debates with two other bodyguards of King Darius
the topic ‘What one thing is strongest?’ In claiming that truth is the strongest of
all, he notes:
      All God’s works quake and tremble, and with him there is nothing unrighteous.
      Wine is unrighteous, the king is unrighteous, women are unrighteous, all human
      beings are unrighteous, all their works are unrighteous, and all such things. There
      is no truth in them and in their unrighteousness they will perish. But truth endures
      and is strong forever, and lives and prevails forever and ever. (4.36–38)

The passage is reminiscent of the insistence found several times in Job that in
God’s eyes no human being can really be righteous: after all, if even ‘his angels
he charges with error’, if even ‘the heavens are not clean in his sight’, if even
‘the moon is not bright, and the stars are not pure in his sight’, then none born of
women can possibly be deemed righteous (Job 4.17–19; 15.14–16; 25.4–6, NRSV;
cf. also Ps. 143.2). The inﬁnite gap between God and all his creation is thereby
underlined – without it following that distinctions cannot still be drawn between
what is ordinarily meant by ‘righteous’ people and ‘sinners’. Certainly 1 Esdras
follows the biblical narrative elsewhere in recognizing (for example) the upright-
ness of Josiah (1.23).
   10. The Prayer of Manasseh is explicit in distinguishing between the ‘right-
eous’ (Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are mentioned) ‘who did not sin against [God]’
and ‘sinners’ (such as Manasseh) for whom repentance has been appointed ‘so
that they may be saved’ (7–8). Clearly there is no sense here that righteous, God-
pleasing behaviour is beyond human capacities to attain – though, for notorious
sinners, repentance is available as plan B.
   11. 1 Enoch 48 is perhaps best known49 for attributing the origin of evil on earth
to angelic beings who, in deliberate rebellion against God, violated nature’s order

    47. See also Francis Watson’s contribution to this volume, where it is noted that the author of
4 Maccabees believes that ‘in no circumstances, however extreme, is transgression of the law
unavoidable or justiﬁable’ (below, p. 109).
    48. Quotations from the pseudepigraphical writings are taken from the two-volume edition (The
Old Testament Pseudepigrapha) edited by James H. Charlesworth (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
1983–85).
    49. 1 Enoch has also ﬁgured largely in recent discussions of ‘covenantal nomism’: Sanders,
conceding that important concepts are at best implicit in the text, believes that it nonetheless falls
under his umbrella category (Paul and Palestinian Judaism, pp. 346–62, 422–24; Sanders’ approach
to this text is broadly supported by Richard Bauckham, ‘Apocalypses’, in D. A. Carson, et.al. [eds.],
Justiﬁcation and Variegated Nomism, vol. 1, pp. 135–87 [140–42, 147–49]; others dispute the
suggestion (e.g., John J. Collins, The Apocalyptic Imagination: An Introduction to the Jewish Matrix
of Christianity [New York: Crossroad, 1987], pp. 37–38, 63, 154; cf. Between Athens and Jerusalem:
Jewish Identity in the Hellenistic Diaspora [New York: Crossroad, 1986], p. 14; George W. E.
Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1: A Commentary on the Book of 1 Enoch, Chapters 1–36; 81–108
[Hermeneia, Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2001], pp. 50–56; Boccaccini, Middle Judaism, pp. 79,
133). Without entering that dispute here, we may simply repeat that, if 1 Enoch does indeed represent
a pattern of religion different from ‘covenantal nomism’, one in which Enochic revelations rather
88                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

by having intercourse with women, thereby producing giants; and who, moreover,
disclosed to human beings things that ought not to be revealed, thus leading them
into sin (6.1–8.3). The origin of sin and the necessity of divine judgment (begin-
ning with the punishment of the angels and the sending of the ﬂood) are thus
accounted for – without it being said that all human beings were made ‘sinners’
(in the radical sense of the word) or that they are now incapable of doing good.
On the contrary, distinctions between the ‘righteous’ and the ‘wicked’ are main-
tained throughout the various sections of 1 Enoch.50 The wicked are explicitly
and repeatedly condemned because they themselves have committed concrete
and obvious wrongs (1.9; 5.4–5; 27.2; 38.1; 45.1–2; 46.5–8; 60.6; 63.6–9; 94.6–
11; 95.5–7; 96.5–8; 97.7–10, etc.), which have been written down for the day of
judgement (98.8);51 in principle, at least, they are thought capable of doing right
(cf. 104.9).52 That the righteous are frequently identiﬁed with the ‘elect’53 might
seem to eliminate notions of human responsibility; in fact, however, the right-
eous (or ‘elect’) are repeatedly summoned to ‘seek for [themselves] and choose
righteousness and the elect life’ (94.4), and promised rewards when they do so;
and they, too, must exercise care to avoid the paths of wickedness (‘Do not walk
in the evil way, or in the way of death! Do not draw near to them lest you be
destroyed!’ [94.3; cf. 91.4, 19; 94.1; 104.6]).54 In short, even though 1 Enoch sees
superhuman forces at the roots of human evil, it does not share Paul’s ‘pessimis-
tic’ view that ‘there is none righteous’, that none can ‘please God’ (Rom. 3.10;
8.8).55


than Israel’s covenant and law provide the crucial basis for salvation, then the ‘Judaism’ with which
Paul is familiar, both from his own upbringing and from the controversies sparked by his mission, is
closer to ‘covenantal nomism’ than to ‘Enochic’ strands within Judaism (see nn. 30 and 32 above).
   50. Note, e.g., the reference to ‘all the righteous ones’ in 12.17. According to 81.5, Enoch was
to tell Methuselah ‘that no one of the ﬂesh can be just before the Lord; for they are merely his own
creation’. The notion that the gap between creator and created is so great that no human could
possibly meet God’s approval is a theme found in Job and elsewhere (cf. the discussion of 1 Esdras
above). For 1 Enoch (here ‘The Book of the Heavenly Luminaries’), as elsewhere, however, this
does not mean that one cannot speak of ‘righteous’ human beings and distinguish them from
sinners; the rest of ch. 81 does precisely that (the immediately preceding verse is a beatitude of the
righteous, and v. 9 speaks of ‘those who do right’). Note, too, how 5.8 reckons with the sin of those
who are nonetheless considered righteous.
   51. Indeed, 98.4 appears to insist on the responsibility of human beings for their own sin
(‘neither has sin been exported into the world. It is the people who have themselves invented it.
And those who commit it shall come under a great curse’): ‘the passage serves an important
clarifying and corrective function within 1 Enoch as a whole. The myth of the rebel angels not-
withstanding (see chs 6–11), human beings are responsible for their deeds’ (Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch
1, p. 477; Nickelsburg goes on to suggest that this passage in 1 Enoch reﬂects a common tradition
with Sir. 15.11–17.24).
   52. Remarkably, 1 Enoch even has a place for the repentance and salvation of Gentiles (10.21;
50.2–3; 90.37–38; 91.14).
   53. So in the ‘Book of Watchers’ (chs 1–36), twice in the ‘Epistle of Enoch’ (chs 91–105), but
frequently in the ‘Parables’ (chs 37–71) (see Bauckham, ‘Apocalypses’, pp. 142–43).
   54. ‘Thus election is not envisaged as contradicting human freedom to choose the good’
(Bauckham, ‘Apocalypses’, p. 145).
   55. Nickelsburg (1 Enoch 1, p. 46) sees in 1 Enoch a juxtaposition of two explanations of the
 WESTERHOLM Paul’s Anthropological ‘Pessimism’ in its Jewish Context 89

   12. Though 2 Enoch, like 1 Enoch, tells of the Watchers who took the daugh-
ters of men as wives, produced giants, and deﬁled the earth by their deeds (18.4),
the capacity of human beings to do good seems, again, not to be affected. Free
will is explicitly said to be given to Adam, and appears to be retained by his
descendants.
      And I gave [Adam] his free will; and I pointed out to him the two ways – light and
      darkness. And I said to him, ‘This is good for you, but that is bad’; so that I might
      come to know whether he has love toward me or abhorrence, and so that it might
      become plain who among his race loves me. (2 En. 30.15)

Exhortations to do what is right are frequent (e.g., 2.2; 36.4), as are descriptions
of the ‘righteous’ who live as they ought (9.1; 41.2; 42.6; 70.1, etc.).
   13. The tender-hearted seer of 4 Ezra repeatedly laments both the evil incli-
nation56 found within each human being and Adam’s sin, suggesting that the
waywardness of the race, and of Israel in particular, ought therefore to be excused
or forgiven.
      The ﬁrst Adam, burdened with an evil heart, transgressed and was overcome, as were
      also all who were descended from him. Thus the disease became permanent; the law
      was in the people’s heart along with the evil root, but what was good departed, and the
      evil remained. (4 Ezra 3.21–22; cf. 4.30)

      O Adam, what have you done? For though it was you who sinned, the fall was not
      yours alone, but ours also who are your descendants. (7.48[118]; cf. 3.26; 7.[48])

His angelic interlocutor will have none of it. Human beings have none but
themselves to blame for their sin.57 With the evil inclination they were also
given freedom, and it was in their power to overcome the disposition to evil and
to do good (cf. 7.[92]). Their sin is therefore inexcusable.
      God strictly commanded those who came into the world, when they came, what they
      should do to live, and what they should observe to avoid punishment. Nevertheless
      they were not obedient, and spoke against him. (7.21–22)

      Do not ask any more questions about the multitude of those who perish. For they also
      received freedom, but they despised the Most High, and were contemptuous of his
      Law, and forsook his ways… For the Most High did not intend that men should be
      destroyed; but they themselves who were created have deﬁled the name of him who
      made them, and have been ungrateful to him who prepared life for them. (8.55–60; cf.
      also 7.57–61[127–31]; 9.10–12)


origin and presence of sin in the world: ‘(1) sin and evil are the function of a primordial heavenly
revolt whose results continue to victimize the human race; (2) responsibility for sin and evil lies
with the human beings who transgress God’s law’. Neither cancels out the other, though different
sections of the book show different emphases.
   56. On the ‘evil heart’ in 4 Ezra, see Michael Edward Stone, Fourth Ezra: A Commentary on the
Book of Fourth Ezra (Hermeneia, Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1990), pp. 63–65. Stone notes that in
4 Ezra it is the evil inclination, not sinfulness itself, that has been inherited by Adam’s descendants.
   57. It is worth observing that in 4 Ezra, undoubtedly among the most negative of the texts of our
study in its assessment of human moral performance, ‘the ﬁgure of Satan plays no role’ (Stone,
Fourth Ezra, p. 64 n. 21) and human freedom and responsibility are strongly emphasized (Stone,
Fourth Ezra, pp. 257, 288).
90                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

That some (Ezra himself among them [6.32; 7.(77); 8.47–49]) measure up to
divine standards of righteousness demonstrates that it is within human capacity
to do so (cf. 7.[88–89]); and if those who do are far outnumbered by sinners who
do not, then the seer should reﬂect on how much more rare – and more valued –
is gold than clay (7.[52–61]; 8.1–3).
   14. Second Baruch also raises the issue of the impact of Adam’s sin on his
descendants.
      O Adam, what did you do to all who were born after you? And what will be said of the
      ﬁrst Eve who obeyed the serpent, so that this whole multitude is going to corruption?
      (2 Bar. 48.42–43; cf. 18.2; 56.5–7)

The answer, again, is that the choices that faced Adam face each of his descen-
dants as well: and they have the same opportunity to do good or evil.
      Those who do not love your Law are justly perishing. And the torment of judgment
      will fall upon those who have not subjected themselves to your power. For, although
      Adam sinned ﬁrst and has brought death upon all who were not in his own time, yet
      each of them who has been born from him has prepared for himself the coming
      torment. And further, each of them has chosen for himself the coming glory. For truly,
      the one who believes will receive reward… Adam is, therefore, not the cause, except
      only for himself, but each of us has become our own Adam. (54.14–19; cf. 19.1;
      48.38–40; 51.16; 55.2)

And again, the book speaks repeatedly of those who are righteous as well as of
the wicked (9.1; 11.4; 14.5–7; 21.11; 24.1) – though noting that, in the end, all
who are born require God’s mercy (i.e., no human being can really be righteous
before God; 84.11), and stressing as well that even sinners can repent and obtain
God’s grace (41.4; 42.5; 77.6–7).
   15. According to the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, human beings are
faced with a choice between ‘two ways’, that of good and that of evil (T. Levi
19.1; T. Ash. 1.3–5). Dispositions to both are found within them (T. Jud. 20.1–3;
T. Ash. 1.5). The evil spirits of Beliar dominate those who choose evil (T. Dan
4.7; T. Naph. 8.6; T. Ash. 1.8–9) but have no power over those who do the right.
      If promiscuity does not triumph over reason, then neither can Beliar conquer you.
      (T. Reub. 4.11)

      You do these [pious actions] as well, my children, and every spirit of Beliar will ﬂee
      from you. (T. Iss. 7.7)

      Those who are silent in purity of heart will be able to hold fast God’s will and to shunt
      aside the will of Beliar. (T. Naph. 3.1; cf. T. Sim. 3.5; T. Iss. 4.4; T. Dan 5.1; T. Benj.
      3.3–4; 6.1)58

The patriarchs repeatedly urge their sons to choose what is good, assuring them
that evil can be overcome (T. Sim. 3.4), and noting that God is well pleased with
those who make right choices (T. Sim. 5.2; cf. T. Iss. 4.1; T. Dan 1.3). Several of
the patriarchs are prepared to testify to the purity of their own lives (T. Iss. 3.2–4;

   58. Note that in the Apocalypse of Abraham as well the righteous are not deceived by Azazel,
though the latter rules over those who ‘desire evil’ (13.7–14; 23.9–13).
 WESTERHOLM Paul’s Anthropological ‘Pessimism’ in its Jewish Context 91

T. Zeb. 1.4–5; T. Ash. 5.4; T. Jos. 1.3) – though this may involve a good deal of
explaining about their role in the sale of Joseph into slavery (T. Zeb. 1.5–4.13),
and Reuben concedes that the period of his sinlessness dates from the time of his
encounter with Bilhah (T. Reub. 4.4).
   16. Satan makes an obligatory appearance in Testament of Job; but no more
than in the canonical counterpart is Satan able to act without divine authorization
(T. Job 8.2–3; 16.2; 20.2). And though Satan does succeed in leading Job’s wife
astray (23.11; 26.6), Job proves more than his match – as Satan himself admits,
with sobs and shame (27.2–6). Job’s own proverbial righteousness reaches unpar-
alleled heights in the Testament when he follows up his feeding of widows by
accompanying their hymn-singing on the lyre (14.2–3).
   17. In Testament of Abraham,59 the patriarch’s righteousness warrants his
singling out for the honor of being informed in advance – by Michael, God’s
Commander-in-Chief – that he is about to leave the vain world and journey to
God (T. Abr. 1.4–7). So righteous does he prove to Michael that the angel cannot
bring himself to break the news to Abraham (4.6). At last Abraham is told – and
ﬂatly refuses to accompany Michael back to God. Ultimately he strikes a bargain,
saying that he would be willing to quit this life if he could ﬁrst be shown ‘all the
inhabited world and all the created things which [God] established’ (9.4–6). The
wish is granted. But Abraham, who had himself lived without sin, has no mercy
on sinners when he sees them and invokes divine judgment upon them. God has
to stop the chariot on its tour since, if Abraham ‘were to see all those who pass
their lives in sin, he would destroy everything that exists’ (10.12–13). God
himself is merciful, giving sinners every chance to ‘convert and live’ (10.14).
In the judgment scene that follows, the wicked are said to far outnumber the
righteous (11.12). But both are to be found: there is (again) no suggestion that
humans are incapable of doing good.
   18. The Letter of Aristeas blithely assumes that all humankind worships the
God of Israel, albeit under different names (16); it is the part of piety to acknow-
ledge that God, the creator of all, directs the ‘acts and intentions’ of all human
beings whenever they attend to what is right (18).60
      It is a gift of God to be a doer of good works and not of the opposite. (231)
      Self-control…is impossible to achieve unless God disposes the heart and mind toward
      it. (237)
      You [King Ptolemy II] excel all men in your moderation and humanity – God having
      endowed you with these gifts. (290)

      You consider injustice the greatest evil, and by your just government in all things have
      won glory for yourself which is imperishable – God granting you to have a pure mind
      untainted by any evil. (292; cf. also 238, 248, 271, 272, 274, 282, etc.)

   Bad company can, to be sure, lead to a person’s ruin (130). And humanity’s
inclination to pleasure has led to much injustice and greed (277). ‘The virtuous

  59. Recension A is cited throughout.
  60. Cf. Boccaccini, Middle Judaism, pp. 172–74. For a similar insistence in Philo, see John
Barclay’s paper in this volume.
92                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

disposition, on the other hand, restrains those who are attracted to the rule of
pleasure, and commands them to respect self-control and justice more highly.
God directs all these matters’ (278). In short, the God who creates and governs
all lies behind all that is good. That said, nothing suggests that the human beings
God has made are incapable of doing good.
    19. Israel’s habitual waywardness is well known to the author of Jubilees
(1.7–14, 22). Nonetheless there is no doubt that Israelites are in a position to do
what is right, should they choose to do so: such a capacity is implied in the
exhortations found throughout the book, and it is conﬁrmed by the recognition
of righteous people within Israel (17.17–18; 23.10; 35.3, 6, 12, etc.). Even the
attacks of demons against them fail (18.9–12; 19.28; cf. 1.20; 12.20). Moreover,
God has ordained the rites of the Day of Atonement to cleanse Israel of its sins
(34.18–19), and repentance is open even to sinners within Israel (1.15, 23; 5.17–
18; 41.25) – provided they have not committed any of the unforgiveable sins,
about which Jubilees has a good deal to say (15.33–34; 30.14; 33.18, etc.).
    Gentiles are another matter.61 That none does what is right is self-evident to
our author (21.21; 22.16–18); nor is it thinkable that any will survive the day of
judgment (15.26; 22.22). That our author believes them culpable for their wrong-
doing is also clear (5.13–16). What is not apparent – the issue does not exercise
the author of Jubilees – is whether there was ever any chance that they could do
otherwise. For one thing, the laws of Torah, including those that distinguish Jews
from Gentiles – Sabbath observance, circumcision, observance of Jewish festi-
vals – are the laws by which the universe is run; even angels observe them (2.17–
22; 6.17–19; 15.25–27, etc.); yet Gentiles do not, and apparently cannot – the
text stresses that the Sabbath in particular was granted solely to Israel (2.31–33;
cf. also 15.28–29) – and are damned for their failure (2.25; 15.26). Moreover,
they are deceived by demons, who ‘are (intended) to corrupt and lead astray’
(10.8; cf. 7.27; 8.3; 11.5–6). On the one hand, subjection to demonic forces may
be portrayed as a divine judgment for human sin (‘because the evil of the sons of
men is great’ [10.8]); yet God is also said to have delivered the Gentile nations
into the power of demons in order that they might be led astray – while reserving
Israel for his own rule.
      (There are) many nations and many people, and they all belong to (God), but over all
      of them he caused spirits to rule so that they might lead them astray from following
      him. But over Israel he did not cause any angel or spirit to rule because he alone is
      their ruler and he will protect them. (15.31–32; cf. 16.17–18)

   20. The Ascension of Isaiah speaks of a prince of the forces of evil, variously
named Sammael, Beliar or Satan. Beliar is called ‘the angel of iniquity who rules
this world’ (2.4); Manasseh’s wickedness is linked to Beliar, who is said to dwell
in Manasseh’s heart (1.9; 3.11). Though the text has many Christian interpola-


   61. Cf. Terence L. Donaldson, Paul and the Gentiles: Remapping the Apostle’s Convictional
World (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1997), pp. 52–53: ‘Without a doubt, the most unrelentingly
negative characterization of the status of the Gentiles is to be found in Jubilees… No other text is as
categorical in restricting salvation to Israel’.
 WESTERHOLM Paul’s Anthropological ‘Pessimism’ in its Jewish Context 93

tions, these elements of the text require no such explanation. There is no reﬂec-
tion on whether the inﬂuence of demonic forces can be overcome.
   21. In Joseph and Asenath, Joseph is portrayed as a paragon of virtue; Levi
and Benjamin, too, fear the Lord and do what is right (22.13; 23.9; 27.1). The
great sin in the book is the worship of ‘dead and dumb idols’ (11.7–8; 12.5); but
even for this sin there is repentance, and people of all nations who ‘attach them-
selves to the Most High God’ ﬁnd refuge under the ‘wings’ of Asenath (15.7;
19.5), who herself repented and found new life in the service of the true God
(8.9; 27.10).
   22. The Life of Adam and Eve (extant in Greek as Apoc. Mos. [Apocalypse of
Moses] and in Latin as Vita) shares with much Jewish literature of the period a
tendency to account for what the biblical record left unexplained: it was at a time
when the angels who normally guarded Eve were preoccupied with worshipping
the Lord that she was deceived by the words of the serpent (Vita 33), who had
been deceived by the ﬂattery of the devil (Apoc. Mos. 16), who himself was
jealous of humankind because he had been banished from heaven’s glory for his
refusal to worship Adam (Vita 12–16). Adam in turn was deceived by the devil,
who used Eve’s voice (Apoc. Mos. 21.3–5). All manner of evil befell creation as
a result, including the ‘evil’ heart that humans possess and the concrete sins that
they commit (Vita 44.2; Apoc. Mos. 10.2; 32.2; cf. 13.5). Yet humans are cer-
tainly thought still able to do the good and avoid evil (Apoc. Mos. 28.4; 30.1);
indeed, Adam is assured by God, ‘There shall not be abolished from your seed
forever (those who would) serve me’ (Vita 27.3).
   23. Pseudo-Philo portrays Israel’s habitual waywardness in terms as bleak as
those of the Deuteronomistic history itself; still, there is no suggestion that
anything other than avoidable faults – the Israelites’ failure to attend to God’s
law and the corruption of their own hearts – is responsible (LAB 12.2, 4; 22.5;
28.4; 30.4; 35.3; 49.3). We are reminded at several points of the good things of
which humanity has been deprived as a result of Adam’s sin (13.8–9; 19.10;
26.14); but, though the universal sinfulness of his descendants is acknowledged
(19.9), it is not itself ascribed to Adam. The gift of God’s everlasting law to
Israel made it possible for all humanity – Gentiles explicitly included – to learn
and do what is right (11.1–2). And righteous people who proved faithful in the
midst of crooked and perverse generations are repeatedly mentioned (1.16; 4.11,
16; 6.3; 16.4–5; 38.1–2, etc.). God-pleasing behaviour is thus clearly within
human capacities, even if practised only by a minority.
   24. Pseudo-Phocylides is very concerned with the bad things that people do,
and tells them not to do them; the operative assumption seems to be that people
who are told what not to do are able to comply. The text never speculates about
the origin of evil or suggests that evil is more than the bad things people do.62


   62. On the poem’s peculiar combination of Jewish and Hellenistic traditions and its author as ‘a
highly acculturated Jew, educated in the Greek literary and moral tradition and willing to explore
the common ground between his Jewish heritage and his Hellenistic education’, see Barclay, Jews
in the Mediterranean Diaspora, pp. 336–46.
94                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

    25. The Psalms of Solomon, like the Wisdom of Solomon, are explicit in cred-
iting human beings with the capacity to do what is right as well as what is wrong,
noting that they will be judged according to their deeds.63
      Our works (are) in the choosing and power of our souls, to do right and wrong in the
      works of our hands, and in your righteousness you oversee human beings.

      The one who does what is right saves up life for himself with the Lord, and the one
      who does what is wrong causes his own life to be destroyed, for the Lord’s righteous
      judgments are according to the individual and the household. (Pss. Sol. 9.4–5)

Like their canonical counterparts, these psalms frequently distinguish between
the ‘righteous’ and the ‘sinners’. Both sin, to be sure; but ‘sinners’ are those who
arrogantly persist in sinning.
      The conﬁdence of the righteous (comes) from God their savior;
        sin after sin does not visit the house of the righteous.
      The righteous constantly searches his house,
        to remove his unintentional sins …
      [The sinner] adds sin upon sin in his life;
        he falls – his fall is serious – and he will not get up.
      The destruction of the sinner is forever,
        And he will not be remembered when (God) looks after the righteous. (3.6–11)

God disciplines the righteous so that their sin does not increase (10.1–3; 13.6–11;
16.11); but he destroys the wicked (13.11).
    26. The sectarian literature of the Dead Sea Scrolls64 contains descriptions of
the ‘voluntary’ entrance into the community of those who undertake its vows
(1QS I, 7, 11; V, 1, 6, 8, 10, etc.; cf. 1QH VI, 17–18; XIV, 6–7); expectations or
claims of right behaviour (or even ‘perfection’) on the part of its members (1QS
I, 13–15; II, 1–2; IX, 18–21; CD II, 14–16; VII, 4–6; 4QMMT 93–94; 1Q28a
[1QSa] I, 2–3; 1QpHab VII, 10–12; VIII, 1–3; 1Q28b [1QSb] I, 1–2); exhorta-
tions (directed primarily but not exclusively to community members; cf. 4QMMT
109–117) that imply the ability of the exhorted to do as they are told; and con-
demnations of the wicked that imply (or, indeed, insist on) their responsibility for
their misdeeds (1QS II, 11–17; V, 10–13; 4Q169 [4QpNah] 4, III, 3–4; 1QpHab
VIII, 8–13; 1QH XII, 12–19; XV, 12–13, etc.). In short, there are abundant
grounds for afﬁrming that in this literature, too, human are deemed able to do
both good and evil.
    Yet the qualiﬁcations that must accompany such a claim for the corpus of
literature from Qumran are both more numerous and more radical than with any
of the other (non-Pauline) texts we have treated. Here we can simply list the most


   63. Cf. Simon J. Gathercole, Where is Boasting? Early Jewish Soteriology and Paul’s Response
in Romans 1–5 (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2002), p. 66: ‘What we have here [in the Psalms of
Solomon] is probably the clearest expression from Second Temple times of a symmetrical judgment
according to works, leading to salvation or condemnation’.
   64. References and quotations are taken from Florentino García Martínez, The Dead Sea Scrolls
Translated: The Qumran Texts in English (Leiden: E.J. Brill; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2nd edn,
1996).
 WESTERHOLM Paul’s Anthropological ‘Pessimism’ in its Jewish Context 95

important qualiﬁcations without examining them in detail or asking how (or
whether) they can be thought to cohere with the evidence noted above for human
moral competence.
   i. According to the Community Rule (1QS),65 God has assigned angelic and
human beings alike to the dominion of either the Prince of Lights or the Angel of
Darkness (1QS III, 17–21; IV, 15–26; cf. 1QM XIII, 9–15; 1QH VI, 11–12).
Inasmuch as the lot to which each has been assigned was determined before their
birth, God can be said to have created both the righteous and the wicked (1QH
VII, 16–26; XII, 38). Moreover, each individual deed done by the righteous and
the wicked alike has been predetermined by God (1QS III, 13–17; cf. 1QM I, 10;
4Q180 [4QAges] 1,1–4; 1QH IX, 7–8, 20; cf. what Josephus says about the
Essenes, Ant. 13.172; 18.18). The Angel of Darkness exercises ‘total dominion’
over his thralls (1QS III, 20–21); even the Sons of Light are subject to his inﬂu-
ence – this explains their continued sins – though God assists them in their
struggles (1QS III, 21–25; cf. 11Q5 XIX, 15). From this perspective, then, the
Sons of Darkness (including all Gentiles) cannot be said to have the capacity to
do good; and that the Sons of Light may do so is (again, from this perspective)
not a consequence of any inherent capacity of their own.
   ii. As we have seen, several texts in the Jewish Scriptures insist that, in the
presence of God, no mere human being can be deemed righteous; the notion
ﬁnds occasional restatement in post-biblical Jewish literature as well. It becomes
a major theme, however, in the Qumran hymns: the continued sinfulness of com-
munity members themselves is repeatedly stressed. Any ‘righteousness’ they pos-
sess must come from God (cf. 1QH IV, 21–24).
      O YHWH, do not judge me by my sin
      because no-one living is just in your presence. (11Q5 XXIV, 7; cf. 1QH XV, 28; 1QH
      XVII, 14–17)

      [One born of woman] is a structure of dust shaped with water,
      his base is the guilt of sin,
      vile unseemliness, source of impurity,
      over which a spirit of degeneracy rules…
      Only by your goodness is man acquitted,
      [puriﬁed] by your abundant compa[ssion.] (1QH V, 21–23; cf. IX, 21–23; XII, 29–32)

      However, I belong to evil humankind
      to the assembly of wicked ﬂesh;
      my failings, my transgressions, my sins, {…}
      with the depravities of my heart,
      belong to the assembly of worms
      and of those who walk in darkness.
      For to man (does not belong) his path,


   65. The crucial text (the ‘Sermon on the Two Spirits’, 1QS III, 13–IV, 24) is treated at length in
Philip Alexander’s contribution to this volume, which demonstrates as well that the dualism and
determinism of this text is ‘all pervasive in Qumran theology’. Alexander also notes, however, that
the scrolls can speak of people sinning without any suggestion that they are anything other than free
agents, faced with choices and choosing between them. He sees in the latter passages reﬂections of
the everyday human experience of freedom.
96                           Divine and Human Agency in Paul

      nor to a human being the steadying of his step;
      since judgment belongs to God,
      and from his hand is the perfection of the path. (1QS XI, 9–11)

   iii. Humans can only do what is right if they know what they are required to
do;66 but knowledge of (the correct interpretation of) God’s laws is now con-
ﬁned to the community (1QS IX, 18–21) – and is a signal gift of God’s favour.
Others are in no position to obey God’s laws (though, to be sure, those who
rejected the Teacher of Righteousness are deemed guilty for that reason).
      But with those who remained steadfast in God’s precepts, with those who were
      left from among them, God established his covenant with Israel for ever,
      revealing to them hidden matters in which all Israel had gone astray: his holy
      Sabbaths and his glorious feasts, his just stipulations and his truthful paths,
      and the wishes of his will which man must do in order to live by them. (CD III, 12–16)


                                 3. Preliminary Conclusions
‘Can mortals be righteous before God?’ Paul’s negative answer to the question
follows naturally from his conviction that God ‘delivered up’ his Son for the
salvation of humankind. The steps in the argument seem straightforward.
   1. God requires goodness of all human beings (a goodness that is spelled out
in the Mosaic law).
   2. By God’s design, Christ died for our sins.
   3. If, in God’s view, humans could be righteous by doing what is good (=
through the law), then Christ would not have had to die.
   4. Hence, in God’s view, humans cannot do the goodness God requires of
them: ‘No one will be justiﬁed by the works of the law’.67
   Indeed, the radical nature of humanity’s sinfulness can only have been under-
lined by the drastic nature of the divine remedy: humanity corrupted by sin must
die with Christ on the cross if it is to rise to life in the new creation, in which sin
can have no place (Romans 6).
   It would also seem to follow, however, that a Judaism for which Jesus is not
the Christ does not have the same reasons for thinking humanity incapable of

   66. Cf. Alexander’s insistence (in his contribution to this volume) that (in 1QS) ‘people cannot be
righteous without a knowledge of the truth’, and that the ‘whole practical scheme of salvation’ implied
in the text is ‘based on study of Torah and the words of the Teacher of Righteousness’.
   67. Gal. 2.16; cf. Rom. 3.20. On one of the many interpretations of Gal. 2.17, the logic behind
the verse (in its context) roughly parallels that spelled out above: Gentiles but not Jews are
acknowledged to be ‘sinners’ (2.15); but if ‘we ourselves who are Jews’ have believed in Christ in
order to be justiﬁed by him, then it follows that we too are ‘sinners’; i.e., from the solution the plight
is deﬁned. Cf. also the pivotal text in Sanders’ argument, Gal. 2.21.
   One should not, of course, attribute Paul’s negative statements about human moral capacities
solely to the logic of such arguments. Paul was clearly affronted (as many Jews were) by the
idolatry and immorality of the Gentile world; he must have sensed the enormity of his own wrong
in ‘violently persecuting the church of God’ (Gal. 1.13); he no doubt shared with other religious
Jews a profound sense that, in the presence of God, no human can be ‘pure’, etc. There is no reason
to think that his head and his heart were not at one on this issue.
 WESTERHOLM Paul’s Anthropological ‘Pessimism’ in its Jewish Context 97

doing good. Furthermore, a Judaism for which the Sinaitic covenant provides
the framework within which God’s favour is enjoyed appears committed to the
conviction that human beings (or Jews at least) can do the good required by the
covenant for participation in its blessings. Different understandings of the re-
quired ‘good’ account for much of the diversity that characterized Judaism at
the turn of the era; but all who think the Sinaitic covenant still in operation as a
covenant of blessing must think humans capable of meeting its conditions.68
    The anthropologies of Paul and Judaism cannot, then, be considered in isola-
tion from their respective ‘soteriologies’: different plights demand different
solutions, and (as Sanders has reminded us) different solutions demand different
plights. Broadly speaking, our survey of the literature supports the notion that
Paul’s anthropology, in corresponding to his ‘soteriology’, is a good deal more
‘negative’ than the anthropology typical among his contemporary Jews.
    Even a swift survey such as this, however, suggests nuances that may be
added to broad claims of this sort. I conclude this paper by listing a number of
observations to be tested in a more thorough examination of the literature.
    1. Though Jewish sources routinely distinguish between the ‘righteous’ and
‘sinners/the wicked’ based on the fundamental orientation of people’s lives, they
also routinely acknowledge that all human beings do in fact sin and that all are
in need of God’s mercy. The sense that no human can (really) be ‘righteous’ in
God’s eyes is also occasionally represented (e.g., 1 Esdras, 1 Enoch, 2 Baruch).
It becomes thematic in the Qumran hymns, which stress (as does Paul) that any
‘righteousness’ possessed by humans must be theirs by divine gift.
    2. The portrayal of God’s people as historically, and perhaps inherently, rebel-
lious is as frequent in post-biblical Jewish writings as in the Jewish Scriptures
themselves. And as in the Jewish Scriptures, there are occasional references to
the transformation that God must bring about in the hearts of his people if they
are to participate in the coming age of righteousness. These considerations do
not, however, lead to a sense that righteous behaviour is beyond human achieve-
ment. (See the comments on Baruch, Jubilees, and Pseudo-Philo above. Paul, of
course, believed himself to be living in the eschatological age of transformation
and new creation, and believed such transformation to be a prerequisite for God-
pleasing human behaviour.)
    3. At times the number of ‘righteous’ may be seen as very limited indeed (e.g.,
4 Ezra, Testament of Abraham, Pseudo-Philo); this, too, does not lead to a sense
that righteous behaviour is beyond human achievement. (For Paul, ‘there is none
righteous’.)
    4. Though the sin of Adam and Eve is acknowledged to have brought death to
humankind, it is generally not thought to have determined the moral character of
their descendants (see 2 Baruch). Where humans are thought to be plagued by an
evil heart (or inclination), they are not deemed incapable of doing good (4 Ezra,
Life of Adam and Eve, rabbinic texts). (For Paul, Adam’s disobedience made
‘many’ [= all] ‘sinners’.)


  68. Cf. Watson, Paul and the Hermeneutics of Faith, p. 342.
98                     Divine and Human Agency in Paul

    5. An unexpected (and perhaps counter-intuitive) result of our survey is that
there appears to be no direct relationship in the texts between the activity of
demonic forces and human moral capacities. Where the activity of demonic
forces is emphasized (e.g., 1 Enoch, 2 Enoch, Testaments of the Twelve Patri-
archs, Jubilees), it is not thought to preclude the possibility of human goodness.
(In Jubilees, Gentiles ruled by demons are incorrigibly wicked, though whether
the rule or the wickedness comes ﬁrst appears to be a chicken-and-egg proposi-
tion.) Conversely, in the texts that are most pessimistic about human moral per-
formance (4 Ezra, Testament of Abraham, Pseudo-Philo), demonic powers are
not a factor. (Nor, as we have seen, do they ﬁgure largely in Paul’s accounts of
human sin.)
    6. The sectarian literature of the Dead Sea Scrolls is here an exception: those
under the rule of the Angel of Darkness (a ‘lot’ to which they have been assigned)
are incapable of pleasing God and destined for damnation. The predestination of
the scrolls does not, however, eliminate human responsibility.
    7. Where (as in Jubilees) righteous behaviour is thought to be found only
among those who submit to the distinctively Jewish practices prescribed in the
Mosaic law (thus automatically excluding Gentiles who do not know them), or
where (as in the sectarian literature of the Dead Sea Scrolls) it is thought to be
found only among those who submit to a recently revealed interpretation of
Mosaic statutes (thus automatically excluding most Jews as well), the Jewish
literature introduces limitations to the possibilities of human righteousness
unknown even to Paul.
    8. A number of Jewish texts envisage the possibility of Gentiles who are
righteous as Gentiles (e.g., Wisdom of Solomon; Pseudo-Phocylides); others
are at least open to Gentiles who are willing to become proselytes (e.g., Judith,
Joseph and Asenath). Some texts, however, write off the entire Gentile world as
hopelessly mired in sin (e.g., Jubilees, the sectarian literature of the Dead Sea
Scrolls). (For Paul, ‘there is no difference’ between Jews and Gentiles in terms
either of sinfulness or of the path to righteousness through faith.)
    9. A number of texts add vast numbers of contemporary Jews to the ranks of
‘sinners’. This is, as noted above, particularly true of the Qumran literature. Here,
though life is still lived within the framework of the Mosaic covenant, the correct
interpretation of its laws is a matter of recent revelation, and obedience to God’s
will is only possible within the community to which that revelation was entrusted.
In a sense, then, the Qumran literature occupies a half-way position between,
on the one hand, those Jews who believed that God’s favour was enjoyed by all
who were willing to submit to the laws of the covenant, and Paul, who no longer
regarded the Sinaitic covenant as a salviﬁc institution.
                                    Chapter 6

         CONSTRUCTING AN ANTITHESIS: PAULINE AND OTHER
        JEWISH PERSPECTIVES ON DIVINE AND HUMAN AGENCY

                                 Francis Watson


Paul has typically been characterized as the archetypal opponent of the claim
that divine saving action is consequent upon human action that conforms to the
revealed will of God. On this view, what Paul opposes is the claim that the pri-
mary location of divine saving action is the eschatological future. The present is
characterized above all by the demand for modes of human conduct oriented
towards the future divine vindication; divine action is most fundamentally reac-
tion rather than initiative. In opposition to all such apparent prioritizing of human
over divine agency, Paul insists that God’s act in Christ encompasses past and
present as well as future, and that the primary human act elicited by the divine
saving action is simply its own acknowledgment as divine saving action – an
acknowledgment or recognition that Paul calls ‘faith’. The great Pauline antith-
eses – faith and works, grace and law, Spirit and letter, slavery and freedom, and
so on – are typically understood as attempts to articulate the opposition between
two competing views of the relation of divine to human agency.
   Thus, speaking of the ‘remnant’ of faithful Israelites that exists now as it did
in Elijah’s day, Paul states that this remnant is founded on the divine election of
grace – adding in explanation that ‘if it is by grace it is no longer by works, for
then grace would no longer be grace’ (Rom. 11.6). ‘Grace’ here stands for divine
saving agency, whereas ‘works’ represents a form of human agency which appears
to have become superﬂuous in the light of ‘grace’. Paul here leaves his readers in
no doubt as to the sharpness of the antithesis he discovers at this point. His state-
ment echoes an earlier assertion about the divine election, where the case of Jacob
and Esau is used to show that election is realized through God’s call, irrespective
of the good or evil deeds that they may later have performed (Rom. 9.11–12).
Whether the reference is to ‘grace’ or to ‘the one who calls’, Paul’s understand-
ing of divine agency entails the corollary, ‘not by works’ (9.12) or ‘no longer
by works’ (11.6). On the conventional western and Protestant view, what is
excluded here is the belief that salvation originates in the human endeavour to
live by the revealed divine will. This belief is excluded on the grounds that
God’s saving action in Christ is radically prior to all human action. That salva-
tion is ‘by grace’ means that it is ‘not by works’: the afﬁrmation and the negation
are interdependent.
100                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   In opposition to such an account, recent Pauline scholarship has sought to
restore the Pauline antitheses to an original historical context within Second
Temple Judaism. It is now argued that to translate the antitheses into opposing
views on divine and human agency is to replace the apostle’s concrete and prac-
tical concerns with theoretical abstractions. We should be wary of reading the
later controversies of Augustine and Pelagius or Luther and Catholicism into
the Pauline texts.1 To do so is not only to be guilty of anachronism, it is also to
perpetuate a negative and unfounded caricature of the Judaism against which
Paul reacts. On this view, the primary task of the exegete is to make ﬁrst-century
sense of Paul’s texts; and such a sense will differ fundamentally from the spuri-
ous sense foisted upon them by the devotees of theologically inspired abstraction.
   The question is whether we are compelled to accept this polarizing of ‘old’
and ‘new’ perspectives on Paul – a polarization that seems perversely to mirror
the structure of the Pauline antitheses themselves. In this paper, I shall develop
a position that seeks to overcome the false dichotomy between the old Paul and
the new one, between the ‘apostle of faith’ and the ‘Paul of history’.2 The argu-
ment will be based on the following three assumptions, which I have elaborated
elsewhere:3
   (1) Paul is most appropriately located within a Second Temple Jewish con-
text when he is understood as an interpreter of Scripture alongside other such
interpreters.
   (2) Opposing views on divine and human agency are indeed to be found in
Pauline and other Second Temple Jewish writings, and these derive from differ-
ences in scriptural interpretation and hermeneutics.
   (3) The Pauline antithesis is nevertheless constructed within Pauline discourse,
outside which it simply appears as one further manifestation of the interpretative
difference that is everywhere evident in early Jewish literature.
   As these summary statements indicate, it is possible to envisage a position
that, like the Matthean scribe, draws on interpretative treasures new and old –
rather than playing them off against each other, as though a ‘post-Sanders’ per-
spective had to be opposed at every point to a Lutheran or Augustinian one. The
new is represented by a close attention to the realities of Second Temple Juda-
ism, within which Pauline Christianity is simply one among a number of variant
or deviant forms. The old is represented by the continued preoccupation with
the relation of divine and human agency, although mediated now through the
Pauline reading of the scriptural texts.4

   1. See, for example, the forceful statement of this point by S. Stowers, A Rereading of Romans,
New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1994, pp. 1–16.
   2. The distinction is borrowed from the title of an article by N. T. Wright, ‘The Paul of History
and the Apostle of Faith’, TynBul 29 (1978), pp. 61–88.
   3. See my book, Paul and the Hermeneutics of Faith (London and New York: T&T Clark
International, 2004).
   4. For important recent work more or less critical of the ‘new perspective’, see D. A. Carson,
Peter T. O’Brien and Mark A. Seifrid (ed.), Justiﬁcation and Variegated Nomism: Volume, vol. 1:
The Complexities of Second Temple Judaism, Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck; Grand Rapids: Baker Aca-
demic, 2001; Simon J. Gathercole, Where is Boasting? Early Jewish Soteriology and Paul’s
                          WATSON Constructing an Antithesis                                     101

    On two occasions, Paul cites a scriptural text that seems to him to encapsulate
a soteriology that is other than, indeed opposed to, that of the gospel: ‘The one
who does these things shall live by them’ (Lev. 18.5). On one occasion, Paul
cites this text in the context of a controversy with Christians who seek to
harmonize the gospel with the way of life prescribed by the law (Gal. 3.12); on
the other, he has in mind an ‘Israel’ which ‘seeks to establish its own righteous-
ness’ (Rom. 10.5; cf. 9.31, 10.3). In both cases, Paul sets the law-observance
highlighted in the Leviticus text over against a text that speaks instead of the
priority of ‘faith’, the recognition and acknowledgment of the divine saving action
(Gal. 3.11, citing Hab. 2.4; Rom. 10.6–9, citing Deut. 30.12–14). The Deuteron-
omy text has, indeed, been drastically rewritten,5 and is therefore attributed not to
Moses but to a personiﬁed ‘Righteousness of faith’: and yet the scriptural text is
still clearly marked out from the Pauline glosses. It seems, then, that Scripture
bears witness not to a single soteriology but to two. It speaks of the faith that
acknowledges God’s prior, comprehensive saving action, but it also speaks of
human law-observance as the divinely appointed way to life. Readers of Scrip-
ture for whom the Leviticus text articulates its central message will read Scripture
as a whole very differently from Pauline readers who ﬁnd their own hermeneuti-
cal key in a text such as Hab. 2.4. The conﬂict of interpretations is grounded in
Scripture itself, and the interpretations conﬂict precisely over the relationship of
divine to human agency. In the Leviticus text, the divine life-giving action is
consequent upon a prior law-observance. In the Habakkuk or (rewritten) Deuter-
onomy texts, the human act of faith is simply the recognition elicited by the prior
divine saving action – which, as we learn elsewhere, is grounded exclusively in
the unconditional promise to Abraham (Gen. 12.3, 15.5, 17.5; Gal. 3.8–9, Rom.
4.16, 18).6 The Pauline doctrine of faith presents itself as an interpretation of
Scripture, and can also account for the fact that this interpretation is unpersuasive
to non-Pauline readers of Scripture – Christian or otherwise.
    On this account, Paul attributes to Christian and non-Christian Jews the view
articulated in the Leviticus text, that salvation or ‘life’ must be attained by way
of the observance of the law. In recent scholarship, it has typically been assumed
that Paul cannot have attributed any such view to his fellow Jews7 – or that,


Response in Romans 1–5 (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2002); Stephen Westerholm, Perspectives Old
and New on Paul: The ‘Lutheran’ Paul and his Critics (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2004).
   5. Details in my Paul and the Hermeneutics of Faith, pp. 329–41.
   6. For the Pauline tendency to reduce the multiple ‘promises’ to a singular ‘promise’, see Gal.
3.16–18; Rom. 4.16–18.
   7. So J. D. G. Dunn, The Theology of Paul the Apostle (Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 1998), p. 153,
where the text is taken to mean that ‘keeping the statutes and ordinances of the law was the way of
living appropriate to the covenant… Moses did not say, and Paul did not understand him to say, that
keeping the law was a means of earning or gaining life (in the future)’. For a critique of this view,
see Simon J. Gathercole, ‘Torah, Life, and Salvation: Leviticus 18:5 in Early Judaism and the New
Testament’, in C. A. Evans and J. A. Sanders (eds.), From Prophecy to Testament: The Function of
the Old Testament in the New (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2004), pp. 131–50; see also my Paul
and the Hermeneutics of Faith, pp. 320–23.
102                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

if he did so, he was wrong to do so.8 Why? Because we now recognize that
ﬁrst-century Judaism was not a religion of legalistic works-righteousness but
emphasized the priority of the divine grace manifested in the covenant. We
may agree that pejorative and confused terms such as ‘legalism’ and ‘works-
righteousness’ should be eliminated. Yet there is no a priori reason to suppose
that readers of Torah during the Second Temple period could not have chosen to
highlight the fundamental signiﬁcance of diligent, faithful, costly law-observance
as the way to the fullness of the divine blessings for Israel or for the individual.
Such a position would not necessarily entail a denial of the covenant or a fun-
damental misrepresentation of Scripture or tradition.
    If Pauline antithesis represents an opposition between two readings of Scrip-
ture, it follows that it is almost exclusively to be found in passages where the
question of an appropriate scriptural soteriology is at issue.9 At this point alone,
it matters to Paul to contrast a soteriology grounded in the practices of law-
observance (Leviticus) with one that appeals to a realized divine saving action
grounded solely in the unconditional divine promise (Genesis). In the (more
numerous) passages that speak of the practice of the Christian life, there is little
if any sense of a potential tension between appeals to human and to divine agency.
It is therefore wholly misguided to seek to impose the characteristic structure of
Paul’s righteousness by faith language on Pauline discourse in its entirety. In
ethically oriented contexts, Paul can speak of human agency as incorporated
within the transformative divine agency (cf. Phil. 2.12–13), but the antithetical
model developed in contexts of scriptural controversy has little relevance for
him outside those contexts.10
    In the discussion that follows, two contrasting texts have been selected which
exemplify a scriptural hermeneutic based on the principle enunciated in Leviticus
18.5, and which – to that extent – conform to the hermeneutic that Paul attributes
to his contemporaries. As we shall see, however, the two texts (4QMMT and
4 Maccabees) develop their respective appeals for faithful law-observance in
very different ways, on the basis of different scriptural texts and hermeneutical
assumptions. The contrast between the two formally analogous positions will
demonstrate that the Pauline antithesis between faith and law is a Pauline con-
struct. Paul’s attribution to his contemporaries of a certain view of human and
divine agency is not unfounded, but it should not be understood as a simple
statement of uninterpreted fact.

   8. So H. Räisänen, ‘Legalism and Salvation by the Law’ (1980), repr. in his The Torah and
Christ: Essays in German and English on the Problem of the Law in Early Christianity (Helsinki:
Finnish Exegetical Society, 1986), pp. 25–54.
   9. 1 Cor. 1.18–31 appears to be the only signiﬁcant exception.
   10. I am therefore in substantial agreement with Troels Engberg-Pedersen’s illuminating con-
tribution to this volume, although I believe he is wrong to suggest that an oppositional understanding
of divine in relation to human agency is a product of the modern era. Josephus’ depictions of Sad-
ducees, Pharisees and Essenes refer to competing claims about the relation of divine to human
agency (War 2.162–66; Ant. 13.171–73). Like Paul (another ﬁrst-century Pharisee), Josephus uses
this contrast strategically, for a highly speciﬁc purpose. In no sense does it constitute the heart or
‘centre’ of his thought as a whole.
                           WATSON Constructing an Antithesis                                       103


                         1. Works of the Law and Israel’s Good
Like Paul’s letter to the Galatians, 4QMMT is a letter arising from an interpreta-
tive disagreement over ‘works of the law’. In 4QMMT as in Galatians, this has
led to a sectarian separation from the wider community: ‘We have separated
[wn#rp] from the multitude of the people…and from participating in these
matters…’ (C 7–8) – although the addressee is not to understand this separation
as a sign of treachery or wickedness (C 8–9).11 With the community he repre-
sents, the author is opposed to current practice in the temple at a number of
points, and he writes to inform his addressee about these disputed points and to
persuade him to accept the sect’s view of them, with a view to reform. In a
concluding summary, it is said that ‘we have written you a selection of works of
the law [hrwth y#(m tcqm] which we consider to be for your good and for
that of your people’ (C 26–27). The language here echoes the unfortunately
fragmentary opening: ‘These are a selection of our words [wnyrbd tcqm]…
works [My#(m] which we…’ (B 1–2).12 The ‘B’ section lists around twenty of
these ‘words’ or ‘works’, proposed regulations that explicitly diverge from cur-
rent practice. A fragmentary line may suggest that the common theme of these
regulations is priestly purity (B 3). In some cases, the scriptural basis to the
regulation is clear.13
   Thus, according to Leviticus, the ‘sacriﬁces of well being’ (Miyml#) can take
the form of a ‘thanksgiving’ (ihdwt), in which case the animal sacriﬁce must be
accompanied by offerings of leavened and unleavened bread (Lev. 7.11–14) –
that is by a ‘cereal offering’ (hxnm) (cf. Num. 15.1–12). This sacriﬁce differs
from other sacriﬁces of well being in the requirement that the sacriﬁcial ﬂesh
must be consumed on the day of the sacriﬁce, rather than being left until the fol-
lowing day (Lev. 7.15; cf. 7.16–17, 19.5–6). Nothing is said about the con-
sumption of the cereal offering, however. The author of 4QMMT opposes the
pragmatic view that this may be left until the following day, insisting that it be
consumed on the day of the sacriﬁce; otherwise the priestly practice will cause
iniquity to be imputed to the people (B 9–13). Indeed, it is this danger that
underlies all the proposed regulations (B 26–27): ultimately it is the well being
of the entire people that is at stake.14
   In Lev. 17.3–4 we read of the guilt imputed to the person who kills an ox,
lamb or goat inside or outside the camp without bringing it to the door of the tent

   11. For the text of this work, see E. Qimron and John Strugnell (eds.). DJD, X (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1994). I have also consulted F. García Martínez and E. Tigchelaar, The Dead Sea
Scrolls: Study Edition, vol. 2 (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1998). Translations are my own.
   12. The inclusio here is noted by Carolyn J. Sharp, ‘Phinehan Zeal and Rhetorical Strategy in
4QMMT’, RevQ 18 (1997), pp. 207–22 (207).
   13. A useful overview of the scriptural material relevant to 4QMMT is provided by George J.
Brooke, ‘The Explicit Presentation of Scripture in 4QMMT’, in M. Bernstein, F. García Martínez and
J. Kampen (eds.), Legal Texts and Legal Issues: Proceedings of the Second Meeting of the Inter-
national Organisation for Qumran Studies (Leiden and New York: E.J. Brill, 1997), pp. 67–88 (83).
   14. See the discussion of this passage in relation to a parallel in the Temple Scroll in L. H. Schiff-
man, ‘Miqsat Ma‘aseh Ha-Torah and the Temple Scroll’, RevQ 14 (1990), pp. 435–57 (436–38).
104                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

of meeting as a sacriﬁce. In citing this text, the author of 4QMMT is especially
interested in its topography, asserting that ‘the tent of meeting’ corresponds to
the temple, ‘the camp’ to Jerusalem, and ‘outside the camp’ to locations outside
Jerusalem. According to Lev. 4.12, the remains of the animal sacriﬁced as a sin
offering are to be taken ‘outside the camp’ and burnt ‘in a clean place where
the ashes are poured out’. Since Jerusalem represents the camp, the author of
4QMMT argues that this place for the disposal of sacriﬁcial remains must be
located outside Jerusalem, ‘the place which he chose from among all the tribes
of Israel’ (B 31–33; cf. Deut.12.11). Here and elsewhere, the author is concerned
to assert the holiness of Jerusalem (cf. B 58–61), in opposition perhaps to the
practice of disposing of refuse within the city limits.
   In Lev. 19.19, various types of ‘mixture’ are prohibited: one type of animal
breeding with another, different kinds of seed sown in a single ﬁeld, garments
made of different materials. There are further examples of these illicit mixtures in
Deut. 22.9–11. The author of 4QMMT draws on both passages, extending their
underlying principle to the illegitimate marriages contracted by some of the
priests (B 75–82): the ‘mixture’ here is that of the holy with the unclean.15
   At these and a number of other points, the author communicates to his ad-
dressee various of the priestly ‘works of the law’ that he wishes to establish, in
opposition to current practice. In many cases, there is a scriptural basis to the
proposed regulations. The author is not only concerned with individual practices,
however, but also with a scripturally based understanding of Israel’s current situa-
tion, for which he has recourse especially to Deuteronomy. In the ‘C’ section of
this text, the author seeks to impart a new understanding of the law and the other
scriptures as a whole: the author(s) ‘have [writte]n to you [sing.] so that you may
understand the book of Moses and the book[s of the p]rophets and David’ (C 10).16
In particular, the author is anxious to instruct his addressee about the Deuter-
onomic ‘blessings and curses’ (C 14–15, 18–19, 20). The ﬁrst of three scriptural
citations is fragmentary, but the second and third are clearly identiﬁable:
      It is written that ‘[you will turn aside] from the w[a]y, and evil will befall [you]’. And
      it is wri[tten]: ‘And it shall come to pass, when [all] these [things shall co]me upon
      you in the last days, the blessing and the curse, [then you will take] it to your h[eart].
      And you will return to him with all your heart [and with al]l [your] soul’. (C 12–16)

The passages cited here are drawn from Deut. 31.29 and 30.1–2:
      For I know that after my death you will surely act corruptly and you will turn aside
      from the way which I have commanded you, and evil will befall you in the last days,
      because you will do what is evil in the eyes of YHWH. (Deut. 31.29)

      And it shall come to pass, when all these things shall come upon you, the blessing and
      the curse, which I have set before you, then you will take it to your heart in all the


   15. According to Carolyn Sharp, however, ‘the mixing in question is between Jews and non-
Jews, rather than between priests and non-priests’ (‘Phinean Zeal’, p. 217).
   16. The assumption that ‘David’ here refers to the third division of the canon is, however, chal-
lenged by T. H. Lim (‘The Alleged Reference to the Tripartite Division of the Hebrew Bible’, RevQ
77 [2001], pp. 23–37).
                         WATSON Constructing an Antithesis                                        105

     nations where YHWH your God has driven you. And you will return to YHWH your
     God and you will obey his voice according to all that I command you this day, you and
     your children, with all your heart and with all your soul. (Deut. 30.1–2)

These words of Moses, cited accurately though in abbreviated form by the author
of 4QMMT, are addressed directly to the recipient of the letter. It is he (as repre-
senting the community) who once turned from the way laid down by Moses, but
who is now given the opportunity to acknowledge this error and to turn back to
the Torah. The passages from Deuteronomy enable the author to present the
post-exilic present as a moment of unique opportunity, offering the possibility of
a deﬁnitive turning away from a past dominated by disobedience and the conse-
quent reality of the divine curse. The addressee ﬁnds himself in a position of
immense privilege and responsibility; his reaction to the letter will determine
whether or not he is to play a leading role in Israel’s ﬁnal turning back to God.
    According to Deuteronomy 30.1, the return to YHWH and the Torah will take
place ‘when all these things shall come upon you, the blessing and the curse’ and
when the addressee ‘takes it to heart’. In his attempt to persuade the addressee
that he stands at this critical turning point, the author of 4QMMT must show that
the blessing and the curse have already been partially realized in Israel’s history
– primarily the curse, since the turning point presupposes the reality of exile
and dispersion, but also the blessing. A fragmentary line may have read, ‘[the
bles]sing[s in the days of David and] in the days of Solomon the son of David’
(C 18); and this is followed by a better preserved reference to ‘the curses [which]
came in the d[ays of Jer]oboam son of Nebat and until the captivity of Jerusalem
and of Zedekiah king of Juda[h]’ (C 19). The history of Israel and its monarchs is
the outworking of the Mosaic blessings and curses, and the author can therefore
conclude: ‘We know that some of the blessings and curses have come which are
written in the bo[ok of Mo]ses’ (C 20–21). Since what Moses predicted has come
to pass, and since recognition of this occurrence is a precondition for the ﬁnal
return to YHWH (cf. Deut. 30.1), the addressee is invited to acknowledge that
Israel’s history has turned out just how Moses said it would. Righteous kings have
brought blessing to Israel, unrighteous ones the curse. As Moses implies when
he refers to ‘the blessing and the curse’ in that order, the blessing comes ﬁrst
(David[?], Solomon) and is followed by the curse (Jeroboam to Zedekiah). The
original blessing of the Israelite monarchy has long since been eclipsed by the
curse, but the addressee is in a position to change all that – by implementing the
proposed works of the law, ‘for Israel’s good’ (C 31–32).
    In the author’s citations from Deuteronomy, the phrase, ‘in the last days’ has
slipped out of the ﬁrst text cited (31.29) and found its way into the second (30.1–
2):
     And it is written: ‘And it shall come to pass, when [all] these [things shall co]me upon
     you in the last days, the blessing and the curse, [then you will take] it to your h[eart].
     And you will return to him with all your heart [and with al]l [your] soul.’ (C 12–16)

Having explained the operation of the blessing and the curse in Israel’s history
(C17–21), the author now returns to the phrase, ‘in the last days’:
106                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

      And this is what is meant by ‘the last days’: when they shall return in Isr[ael] to the
      l[aw …], and they shall not turn bac[k…], though the wicked act wick[edly]. (C 21–
      22)

This return to the Torah is already being practised by members of the sect, and
the sectarian author here invites the representative of the wider community to
join them in it. Thus, the whole passage following the Deuteronomy citations
(C 17–22) is devoted to an interpretation of the scriptural references to ‘the bless-
ing and the curse’ and to ‘the last days’, in an attempt to persuade the addressee
of his true location within the scripturally preordained history of Israel.
   The addressee is to return to the law by endorsing the works of the law
prescribed in this letter, and in doing so he is to take as his role models those
kings of Israel who studied the Torah and whose sins were forgiven.17 David is
the pattern for these righteous kings of Israel, who no doubt also include Heze-
kiah and Josiah – even though the latter two lived during the period between
Jeroboam and Zedekiah, which stood as a whole under the law’s curse (cf. Sir.
48.17–49.5). The negative side of Israel’s history here gives way to the positive:
      Remember the kings of Israe[l] and reﬂect upon their works [hmhy#(m], how whoever
      of them feared [the la]w was delivered from troubles; and these were people who
      stu[d]ied the law [hrwt y#[q]bm] and whose transgressions were forgiven. Remember
      David, how he was a man of the pious [Mydsx #)]18 and was [de]livered from many
      troubles and received forgiveness. (C 23–26)

The history of Israel not only tells of the outworking of the divine blessing and
curse, it also offers inspiring examples of righteous conduct. The addressee is to
identify himself with the righteous kings of Israel who studied the Torah and
experienced deliverance and forgiveness as a result – and above all with David,
who, though a king, belonged to the company of the ­asidim.19

    17. The reference in C 23 to ‘the kings of Israel’ may reﬂect the usage of the Chronicler (cf.
2 Chr. 28.27; 33.18; 35.18); so M. Bernstein, ‘The Employment and Interpretation of Scripture in
4QMMT: Preliminary Observations’, in John Kampen and Moshe J. Bernstein (eds.), Reading
4QMMT: New Perspectives on Qumran Law and History (Atlanta: Scholars Press), pp. 29–52 (50).
    18. Or: ‘a man of pious deeds’.
    19. Who is the addressee of 4QMMT? He is addressed respectfully and is differentiated from
the Jerusalem priests whose practice is criticized; yet he must be in a position to impose reform if the
content of the letter is to be relevant to him. The speciﬁc reference to ‘the kings of Israel’ (C 23–26)
suggests that the addressee is one of their successors, and that the letter therefore postdates the
decision of Aristobulus I to adopt the title of ‘king’ (see Josephus, War 1.70; cf. Ant. 13.301).
While Hyrcanus and his father Simon are said to have held ‘the rule of the nation’ together with the
high priestly ofﬁce (1 Macc. 13.42; 14.35, 41–42; 15.2; Ant. 13.291, 299), they are identiﬁed pri-
marily by their high priesthood (1 Macc. 14.27; 15.17, 21, 24; 16.24; Ant. 13.230, 259, 267, 282–
83). The addressee of 4QMMT might have been the anti-Pharisaic Alexander Jannaeus (103–76
BCE); so Otto Betz, ‘The Qumran Halakhah Text Miqsat Ma‘asê Ha-TôrƗh (4QMMT) and Saddu-
cean, Essene, and early Pharisaic Tradition’, in D. R. G. Beattie and M. J. McNamara (eds.), The
Aramaic Bible: Targums in their Historical Context (JSOTSup, Shefﬁeld: Shefﬁeld Academic
Press, 1994), pp. 176–202 (195–96). Traces of a positive view of this ﬁgure are found in Qumran
literature (see 4Q448 and the discussion of possible references in the pesharim in my Paul and the
Hermeneutics of Faith, pp. 102–105).
                          WATSON Constructing an Antithesis                                     107

  The letter concludes with an appeal to the addressee to implement the pro-
posed reforms to current priestly practice, for his own good and the good of his
people Israel:
      We have written to you a selection of the works of the law [hrwth y#(m tcqm]
      which we consider to be for your good and that of your people Isr[a]el. For we have
      noted in you an understanding and a knowledge of the law. Consider all these things,
      and seek from before him that he will make straight your counsel and keep far from
      you evil thoughts and the counsel of Belial. Thus you shall rejoice in the last time in
      ﬁnding that this selection of our words is true. And it shall be reckoned to you for
      righteousness [hqdcl Kl hb#xnw] when you do what is right and good before him,
      for your good and that of Israel. (C 26–32)

The references to a ‘good’ that extends beyond the addressee to ‘your people
Israel’ (C 27, 32) indicate the positive outcome of the return to the Torah for
which the author has earlier appealed on the basis of Deut. 30.1–2 (C12–21).
Beyond the history of the blessings (David, Solomon) and the curses (Jeroboam
to the exile), in which history the curses have long outweighed the blessings,
there lies the possibility of a ﬁnal age in which ‘they will return in Israel to the
l[aw…], and not turn back’ (C 21–22). This ﬁnal age is what scripture calls
‘the last days’ (C 14, 16, 21), or ‘the last time’ (C 30), and the hope is that the
addressee will help to usher in this dawning time by acting as the letter suggests,
aided by his own knowledge of Torah and by the divine assistance that comes
from prayer (C 27–29). The coming future good will conﬁrm both the validity of
the practices he is to implement (C 30) and his own righteousness in implement-
ing them (C 31).
   What does 4QMMT contribute to our line of argument? How far does this
letter conﬁrm the Pauline claim that ‘Israel’ pursues the works of the law in
accordance with the principle of Lev. 18.5, that ‘the one who does these things
shall live by them’?
   On the one hand, this text gives the lie to the current consensus that Second
Temple Judaism invariably understands divine grace as radically prior to human
law-observance, and that to suggest anything to the contrary is to perpetuate an
ancient and malicious caricature. The author of 4QMMT draws primarily on the
closing chapters of Deuteronomy for his understanding of Israel’s current crisis
and opportunity, and on Leviticus for the priestly practices that point the way
towards ‘Israel’s good’. Assuming a functional equivalence between ‘Israel’s
good’ and the ‘life’ conditionally promised in Paul’s Leviticus text, it is clear that
4QMMT does indeed prescribe ‘works of the Torah’ as the divinely appointed
way to the desired goal.20 To that extent, this construal of Scripture is diamet-
rically opposed to the Pauline one. In other words, it conforms closely to the
soteriology that the Pauline antitheses serve to reject.

   20. It is hardly adequate to claim that, in 4QMMT as in Paul, works of law are ‘understood as
deﬁning a boundary which marks out those of faith/faithfulness from others’ (J. D. G. Dunn,
‘4QMMT and Galatians’, NTS 43 [1997], pp. 147–53 [151]). The aim of the letter is precisely that
the ‘boundary’ created by aberrant practice should be removed, for the future well being of the
entire community.
108                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

    On the other hand, 4QMMT only exempliﬁes the claim that law-observance
is the way to life if one subordinates its distinctive characteristics to an abstract
soteriological logic. In this text, the ‘works of the Torah’ relate not to the Torah’s
prescriptions in general, but to its prescriptions on matters of priestly practice
as interpreted by the author and the dissident group he represents.21 Above all,
these regulations are concerned to ensure the holiness of Jerusalem and of the
temple. The author’s programme has a concrete content and context, and is not
simply reducible to a general thesis about the soteriological signiﬁcance of law-
observance. Nor can the general thesis do justice to the rendering of the Deu-
teronomy material that is so crucial for this text. It is only from the perspective
of the Pauline ‘hermeneutic of faith’ that 4QMMT comes to embody the sote-
riological logic that Paul strives to exclude.22 From that perspective, life and
salvation are the outcome of God’s own act in Christ, of which faith is the
acknowledgment; such a claim is necessarily opposed to the claim that life and
salvation stem from law-observance, irrespective of the concrete forms that claim
may take. The image of an Israel that seeks life by law-observance is a Pauline
construct, even though it is related to realities that can be known independently
of Paul.
    The signiﬁcance of this point may be further clariﬁed by turning now to a
second non-Christian Jewish text, the Fourth Book of Maccabees.23 In its own
way, this text also teaches that law-observance is the divinely appointed way to
life. Like 4QMMT, it therefore conforms to the scripturally based soteriology
identiﬁed and rejected by Paul. And yet it is only from a Pauline perspective that
these two texts could possibly look similar.


                          2. The Human Capacity for the Law
Among the Jewish writings of the Second Temple period, 4 Maccabees is virtu-
ally unique in its consistent focus on a philosophical thesis – that ‘devout reason
is sovereign over the passions [CWVQFGURQVQL GUVKP VY`P RCSY`P Q GWUGDJAL
NQIKUOQL]’ (1.1). This thesis is repeated again and again. Although the main part
of the book is devoted to narrative, the author avails himself of a range of philo-
sophical resources in order to establish his thesis. He deﬁnes his terms (1.14–30);

   21. This does not mean that ‘works of the law’ in itself refers exclusively to matters of priestly
practice; only that the author so uses the phrase in this particular context.
   22. Compare Simon Gathercole’s study of ‘obedience and ﬁnal vindication in early Judaism’, in
his Where is Boasting?, pp. 37–194. Gathercole demonstrates conclusively that many Jews of the
Second Temple period understood law-observance as the essential precondition for eschatological
vindication, and that the ‘new perspective on Paul’ is wrong to question this. At the same time, the
juxtaposition of ‘obedience and ﬁnal vindication’ is determined in advance by Paul’s reading of
Lev. 18.5, with the result that the Second Temple material is read here from a Pauline perspective
which may not do justice to its distinctive features.
   23. For a summary of the debate on the dating of this work, see John M. G. Barclay, Jews in the
Mediterranean Diaspora from Alexander to Trajan (323 BCE–117 CE) (Edinburgh: T&T Clark,
1996), pp. 448–49. A late-ﬁrst-century dating cannot be ruled out, but there is no decisive evidence
for this.
                      WATSON Constructing an Antithesis                          109

he draws upon the tradition of the four ‘cardinal virtues’ (1.18: HTQPJUKL MCK>
FKMCKQUWPJ MCK> CPFTGKC MCK> UYHTQUWPJ); he refutes objections (1.5–6, 7.16–
23; cf. 8.16–26, 16.5–10); he stages a debate between the hedonistic philosophy
of ‘the tyrant Antiochus’ and the nomistic theism of Eleazar, the ﬁrst of the
martyrs for the law (5.1–38); he engages in general reﬂections on the nature of
brotherly and maternal love (13.19–27; 14.13–19); he assumes a common human
nature (2.21–23; 12.13); and he is concerned, like Plato in the Phaedo, to demon-
strate that death holds no terrors to those who adhere to the true philosophy. And
yet the central philosophical thesis about reason and the passions is really a thesis
about the law, and about the human being addressed by the law. The Greek phi-
losophical and rhetorical resources that serve to establish the thesis are deployed
in the service of an argument about the Jewish law. The aim of the book is to
demonstrate the possibility of faithful law-observance; the author ﬁnds in the
stories of the Maccabean martyrs (drawn from 2 Maccabees 6–7) a proof that in
no circumstances, however extreme, is transgression of the law unavoidable or
justiﬁable. That is what is implied by his thesis that devout reason is superior to
the passions. Devout reason is reason schooled in the Law of Moses.
    This argument entails a quite different understanding of the law to the Deuter-
onomic one found in 4QMMT and elsewhere. The Deuteronomic view speaks
of a single act of turning from a national past dominated by sin and the ensuing
curse of the law, to a future in which the faithful observance of the law will usher
in the fullness of the divine blessing. In 4 Maccabees, there is no such single act
of turning back to the law, and there is no sense that the nation as a whole stands
under the divine curse. In contrast, the narrative opens at a point where ‘our fathers
were enjoying profound peace because of their observance of the law [FKCA VJAP
GWPQOKCP]’ (4 Macc. 3.20). Antiochus’ persecutions are occasioned by the high
priest Jason’s attempts to alter the nation’s constitution, in deﬁance of the law,
which call forth the divine anger (4.19–21); through the actions of the martyrs,
the divine blessing is restored. Another divergence from the Deuteronomic view
may be seen in the understanding of suffering implied in 4 Maccabees. Antiochus
is still represented as the agent of the divine wrath, like Nebuchadnezzar centu-
ries before, and yet his punitive actions fall not upon the transgressors of the law
(Jason and his supporters) but precisely on those who remain loyal to the law.
The explanation is that those who endure unspeakable tortures, rather than sub-
mitting to the king’s demand that they should eat forbidden foods, are not being
punished for their own sins. On the contrary, their endurance of these sufferings
guarantees their participation in the eternal life of heaven and serves as a vicari-
ous sacriﬁce for the sins of the people as a whole (6.28–29; 17.17–22; 18.4).
    The author’s redaction of material from 2 Maccabees gives important insights
into the nature of his argument. His strategy is to play down his source’s empha-
sis on the ideological struggle between Judaism and Hellenism, and to use the
martyrdom stories instead to demonstrate that, for those schooled in the law,
observance of the law is always possible, even in the most adverse circum-
stances; correspondingly, transgression of the law is never unavoidable or justi-
ﬁable. Thus, 2 Maccabees narrates the attempts of the high priest Jason and of
110                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

King Antiochus to shift the Jewish people over to ‘the Greek way of life’ (4.10),
in deﬁance of the law: the ‘Hellenizing’ motivation of this abandonment of the
law is repeatedly emphasized (2 Macc. 4.10–20; 6.1–9).24 The later work abbre-
viates the material relating to Jason (4 Macc. 4.19–20) and omits altogether the
account of the imposition of the Greek religion (cf. 2 Macc. 6.1–9). For the earlier
author, Hellenism is Judaism’s archetypal ideological opponent: indeed, his use
of the term ‘Judaism’ (KQWFCKUOQL, 2 Macc. 2.21; 8.1; 14.38 [× 2]) appears to
originate in polemical opposition to ‘Hellenism’ (GNNJPKUOQL, 2 Macc. 4.13).25
In contrast, the author of 4 Maccabees has little interest in this ideological con-
ﬂict, and sees the king’s demand that Jews should eat forbidden foods as an
extreme instance of the temptation to transgress, experienced by all who wish
to remain faithful to the law.26 References in his source to ‘Hellenism’ or ‘Greek
customs’ are virtually eliminated.27 The author is concerned not with the con-
ﬂict of ideologies but with the (Greek) philosophical thesis about reason and
the passions, by means of which he aims to demonstrate the practicability of
obeying the law even under intense pressure to transgress. In the Eleazar material
(4 Macc. 5–7), the victory of reason over the passions is ascribed to Eleazar’s
‘philosophy’, which is his life-long study and practice of the law. In the mate-
rial relating to the seven brothers and their mother (4 Macc. 8–18), it is parental
instruction in the law that enables the brothers’ courageous endurance of suffer-
ing. In both cases the extreme suffering that is narrated is itself an act of law-
observance, since it is undergone voluntarily in preference to the alternative,
which is ‘to eat deﬁling food’ (OKCTQHCIJ`UCK), that is, ‘pork’ or ‘food sacriﬁced
to idols’ (4 Macc. 5.2–3). The question put to each of the prospective martyrs is
whether, under threat of torture, they will choose to obey the commandment or
to transgress it. In contrast to his source, the author strongly emphasizes the
voluntary nature of the martyrs’ sufferings.
    The link between the philosophical thesis and the question of law-observance
is already implied in the book’s very ﬁrst sentence, which opens the theoretical
discussion that precedes the main narrative (4 Macc. 1.1–3.18). Here, in stating
his thesis for the ﬁrst time, the author emphasizes that it is ‘devout reason’
(GWUGDJAL NQIKUOQL) that rules over the passions (1.1). Although he usually
speaks simply of ‘reason’, without the additional reference to piety,28 formal

   24. Note the explicit references to Hellenization in 2 Maccabees 4.13 (CMOJ VKL GNNJPKUOQW`);
4.15 (VCAL GNNJPKMCAL FQECL); 6.9 (OGVCDCKPGKP GRK> VCA GNNJPKMC); 11.24 (VCA GNNJPKMC).
   25. So J. D. G. Dunn, The Epistle to the Galatians (BNTC, London: A. & C. Black, 1993), p. 56
(on Gal. 1.13).
   26. John Barclay notes that, in this text unlike its source, ‘the martyrs are pitted against “the
tyrant” (and his human tools) but not against Gentiles or the Gentile world’ (Jews in the Mediter-
ranean Diaspora, p. 376).
   27. The one exception is in 4 Macc. 8.8, where the king advises the brothers to ‘enjoy your
youth by adopting the Greek way of life [GNNJPKMQW` DKQW] and by changing your manner of living’.
The fact that this author can still refer to ‘Judaism’ (4 Macc. 4.26), even in the virtual absence of
the ideological conﬂict with ‘Hellenism’, is an indication that this term, once coined, can be used
outside the context of this conﬂict.
   28. ‘Reason’ (NQIKUOQL) is referred to in unqualiﬁed form on 47 occasions, in all of which the
                          WATSON Constructing an Antithesis                                    111

restatements of his thesis frequently repeat the full phrase.29 Typically, the author
signals a moment of transition between narrative and philosophical commentary
by restating his thesis – ‘Clearly, then, devout reason is sovereign over the pas-
sions’ (6.31) – and by developing it in a series of statements in which ‘devout
reason’ appears simply as ‘reason’.30 ‘Reason’, then, is simply an abbreviation of
‘devout reason’; ‘devout reason’ is the only kind of reason that this author would
recognize as such. If, in arguing that ‘reason is sovereign over the passions’, he
engages with a Greek philosophical debate that goes back at least to Plato, the
fact that ‘reason’ everywhere means ‘devout’ or ‘religious’ reason is an indica-
tion that the philosophical conceptuality now operates within a distinctively
Jewish framework, in which the ‘reason’ in question is the capacity whereby
one knows and observes the law.31 Thus, in apostrophizing ‘reason’ and ‘piety’
(NQIKUOQL and GWUGDGKC), the author treats them as synonyms: ‘O reason of the
children, tyrant over the passions! O piety, more precious to the mother than her
children!’ (15.1). The aged Eleazar claims to be youthful at least in the exercise
of ‘reason on behalf of piety’ (5.31). When, in the midst of his tortures, the ﬁrst
brother tells the king that ‘your wheel is not so powerful as to strangle my reason’
(9.17), he means exactly what the second brother means in speaking of ‘our
endurance for the sake of piety’ (9.30). This correlation of reason and (Jewish)
piety or religion is most clearly expressed in the author’s concluding address to
his readers, where his thesis is restated one last time:
      O offspring of the seed of Abraham, Israelite children, obey this law and in every way
      practise piety [GWUGDGKVG], knowing that devout reason is master of the passions, not
      only of those that stem from within but also of the sufferings that come from without.
      (18.1–2)

   ‘Devout reason’ is nothing other than the capacity that enables one to ‘obey
this law’. There is, indeed, an element of circularity in this claim, for it can also
be said that it is the law which itself enables the ‘devout reason’ by which it is
observed. Thus, ‘reason’ is deﬁned in 4 Macc. 1.17 as the choice of the ‘wis-
dom’ that is the outcome of ‘education in the law’ (J VQW` PQOQW RCKFGKC). The
human capacity to observe the law is not simply a given, it must be cultivated.
Yet the author assumes that, within the sphere of the law, this human potentiality
has already been actualized: here at least, although nowhere else to the same


thesis about reason’s sovereignty over the passions is cited or alluded to. The author keeps his
thesis in sharp focus throughout his work.
   29. This is the case in 4 Macc. 6.31; 7.16; 13.1; 16.1; 18.1–2. There are further occurrences of
the full phrase in 7.4; 8.1; 15.23; 16.4 (cf. also 5.38).
   30. Thus Q GWUGDJAL NQIKUOQL in 1.1 is followed by ﬁve unqualiﬁed references to NQIKUOQL in
1.3–9. A similar pattern occurs in 6.31 with 6.32–7.1 (NQIKUOQL x 5); in 7.16 with 7.17, 20; and in
13.1 (‘…it must be universally acknowledged that…’) with 13.3, 5, 7 (NQIKUOQL, GWNQIKUVKC).
   31. As E. Schürer notes, ‘the reason to which [the author] ascribes command over the passions
is not reason in the sense used by the Greek philosophers but religious reason…, i.e. reason that
follows the norm of the divine law’ (The History of the Jewish People in the Age of Jesus Christ,
175 B.C.–A.D. 135, III.1 [rev. and ed. G. Vermes, F. Millar and M. Goodman; Edinburgh: T&T
Clark, 1993], pp. 589–90).
112                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

degree, there exists a reason sovereign over the passions. The author seeks to
instil in his (Jewish) readers a conﬁdence that this really is the case, and a
renewed determination to conduct their lives on this basis. Reason is sovereign
over the passions; that is to say, the capacity to obey the law’s commandments
has been bestowed upon them in full. If that is true even in boundary situations
where law-observance means torture and death, it is certainly also true for read-
ers who ﬁnd themselves in less extreme circumstances.32
   For the author, this claim about the practicability of the law is derived from
the law itself, and is not a philosophical argument imposed on the law from
outside. The law teaches the sovereignty of devout reason over the passions in
the form of the tenth commandment. Following a reference to the story of Joseph
and Potiphar’s wife, the author claims that reason rules
      not only over the frenzy of sexual passion [JFWRCSGKC] but also over every desire
      [RCUJL GRKSWOKCL]. For that reason the law says: You shall not desire your neighbour’s
      wife or anything that belongs to your neighbour. Indeed, when the law tells us not to
      desire [OJA GRKSWOGKP], my argument that reason is able to control the desires is shown to
      be all the more persuasive. (2.4–6)

Here, the author seeks to identify his thesis with the tenth commandment. In his
view, the commandment does not teach that desire for illicit objects can simply
be eliminated by reason: ‘You shall not desire…’ means not, ‘You shall elimi-
nate desire…’, but, ‘You shall not give way to desire…’ (3.2–5). It is the role of
reason – the mind instructed in the law – to police the desires and to enforce the
rule of law, but the desires themselves have been implanted in us by God or
nature (cf. 2.21; 14.13–19), and belong ineradicably to the human bodily consti-
tution. On this view, the meaning of the tenth commandment is purely formal: it
demands that desires for objects prohibited by the law should not be realized, in
accordance with reason’s God-given capacity to control the passions. To say,
‘You shall…’ or ‘You shall not…’ is to require that an otherwise possible
action should be ruled out in advance, on the assumption both that such an action
is potentially desirable, and that the addressee of the commandment is capable of
resisting his or her desire for it. It is this double assumption about the law as a
whole that is articulated in the tenth commandment. Thus, ‘You shall not desire
your neighbour’s wife…’ is not simply a repetition of, ‘You shall not commit
adultery’. The seventh commandment prohibits an action; the tenth command-
ment traces the action back to its origin in desire, and the abstention from action
to the human capacity to restrain desire. On this reading, the tenth commandment
is the theorization of the other commandments. And this theorization is identical
to the author’s own claim that devout reason – reason schooled in the law – is
master of the passions.
    On this basis, all other commandments can be understood as postulating both
a desire and a human capacity to restrain it. For example, Moses commands that


   32. If the martyrdom stories serve here to demonstrate the thesis about the practicability of the
law, it cannot be said that ‘the major topic of 4 Maccabees’ is ‘the suffering of the Jewish people’
(contra D. J. Harrington, Invitation to the Apocrypha, Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1999, p. 216).
                         WATSON Constructing an Antithesis                                       113

interest-free loans should be given to impoverished fellow-Israelites (Lev. 25.35–
38; cf. Exod. 22.25), that debts should be cancelled every seventh year (Deut.
15.1–11) and that the remnants of the harvest should be left for the poor (Lev.
19.9–10, 23.22; Deut. 24.19–22). In the light of the preceding interpretation of
the tenth commandment, we may understand the logic of these commandments
as follows:
     As soon as one adopts a way of life in accordance with the law, even though he is a
     lover of money, he is forced to act contrary to his natural ways, and to lend without
     interest to the needy and to cancel the debt when the seventh year arrives. If one is
     greedy, he is ruled by the law through his reason so that he neither gleans his harvest
     nor gathers the last grapes from the vineyard. (4 Macc. 2.8–9)

The desire to maximize returns (whether ﬁnancial or agricultural) is both acknowl-
edged and countered by the law, the divine voice that addresses itself to a human
‘reason’ deﬁned by its capacity to understand and to implement its demands,
giving them priority over the contrary demands of desire. The reason that is sov-
ereign over the passions is the human capacity presupposed and constituted by
the law’s address. It is the law’s anthropological correlate, just as the law is
reason’s theological correlate. The anthropological hypothesis of a reason sover-
eign over desire is therefore deduced from the law itself, whose demands make
no sense except on the assumption that this hypothesis is true. The story of the
martyrs for the law is a demonstration and conﬁrmation that this hypothesis is
indeed true, and that the human capacity presupposed and actualized by the law
is a reality.
    For the author of 4 Maccabees, the law intends this human obedience with a
view to the eternal life that is its goal and reward. The presentation here of the
scriptural promise of life diverges markedly from 2 Maccabees, which was the
author’s primary source. In the account of the martyrdoms in the earlier text,
the emphasis lies on the hope of resurrection, interpreted as the martyrs’ divine
vindication. The martyrs taunt the king with this hope, and with the contrasting
fate that awaits him:
     You accursed wretch, you dismiss us from this present life, but, because we have died
     for his laws, the King of the universe will raise us up to an everlasting renewal of life
     [GKL CKYPKQP CPCDKYUKP \YJ`L JOC`L CPCUVJUGK]. (2 Macc. 7.9)
     One cannot but choose to die at the hands of men and to cherish the hope that God
     gives of being raised again by him. But for you there will be no resurrection to life!
     (2 Macc. 7.14)

In this earlier text, there is a symmetry between the mutilation of the body through
torture and its reintegration at the resurrection:
     I got these [tongues and hands] from Heaven, and because of his laws I disdain them,
     and from him I hope to get them back again. (2 Macc. 7.11; cf. 7.29, 14.46)

In 4 Maccabees, however, these references to resurrection have been eliminated
from the account of the brothers’ martyrdom, which is here staged as the dem-
onstration of the invincible power of devout reason. The brother who has his
tongue cut out no longer expresses the hope of getting it back again at the resur-
114                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

rection, but rather his conﬁdence that ‘you will not make our reason speechless’
(4 Macc. 10.19). Consistently with this, a communally oriented emphasis on res-
urrection is replaced by a more individualistic understanding of ‘immortality’.33
The author is specially concerned to show that this is taught by the law itself.
   As they undergo their ordeal, the brothers remind one another that their souls
would be in jeopardy if they were to transgress: ‘Great is the struggle of the soul
and the danger of eternal torment lying before those who transgress the command-
ment of God’ (13.15). Yet religion or piety ‘saves, unto eternal life, according to
God’s word [MCVCA SGQP]’ (15.3). The martyrs win the contest and receive the
prize of ‘immortality in endless life’ (17.12).
      They stand now before the divine throne and live through blessed eternity. For Moses
      says, ‘And all who are sanctiﬁed are under his hands’. (17.18–19)

This ﬁrst scriptural proof of the doctrine of immortality is drawn from Deut. 33.3,
Moses’ concluding blessing:
      And he spared his people, and all who are sanctiﬁed are under his hands, and these are
      under you; and he [Moses?] received from his [God’s] words a law, which Moses com-
      manded us, an inheritance for the synagogues of Jacob (Deut. 33.3–4 LXX).

For the author of 4 Maccabees, to be ‘under his hands’ is evidently synonymous
with ‘living to God’ (7.19; 16.25); the ‘sanctiﬁed’ (or ‘consecrated’) are iden-
tiﬁed speciﬁcally with the martyrs (17.20). Thus Moses, who received the law
from God and handed it on to the people of Israel, also spoke in his ﬁnal address
of the eternal destiny of those who faithfully observe the law, if need be at the
cost of their own lives. The Deuteronomy citation is almost the ﬁrst formal
scriptural quotation in the entire book (with the exception only of the citation of
the tenth commandment in 4 Macc. 2.5), and it indicates the author’s concern to
set his claim about the law as the way to life on a ﬁrm scriptural foundation. This
concern comes into sharp focus in the book’s conclusion, where ﬁve scriptural
proof-texts are given in support of the doctrine of immortality (18.14–19).
    In this passage, the mother recalls the scriptural instruction that her sons had
received from their now deceased father, who ‘taught [them] the law and the
prophets’ (18.10). This was the early training that later enabled their reason to
triumph over their sufferings. The children were taught the scriptural narratives –
about Abel slain by Cain, Isaac offered as a sacriﬁce, Joseph in prison, the zeal
of Phineas, the faithfulness of Daniel and his companions. Scripture offers such
ﬁgures as role models, but it also speaks of the eschatological destiny that awaits
those who follow in their footsteps:
      [Your father] reminded you of the scripture of Isaiah which says, ‘Even if you pass
      through ﬁre, the ﬂame will not burn you’. He sang you the hymn of David which says,
      ‘Many are the afﬂictions of the righteous’. He taught you the proverb of Solomon:

   33. The 2 Maccabees texts depict resurrection as ‘both the personal hope of the righteous
individual and the national hope for faithful Israel’ (N. T. Wright, The Resurrection of the Son of
God, Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2003, p. 153). The redaction of 2 Maccabees 7 in 4 Maccabees
may, however, leads one to question Wright’s claim that resurrection was ‘woven into the very
fabric of ﬁrst-century Jewish praying, living, hoping and acting’ (p. 204).
                         WATSON Constructing an Antithesis                                       115

     ‘There is a tree of life for those who do his will’. He conﬁrmed the saying of Ezekiel:
     ‘Shall these dry bones live?’ For he did not neglect to teach you the song that Moses
     taught, which says, ‘I shall kill and I shall make alive; this is your life and length of
     days’. (18.14–19)

The ﬁnal three texts explicitly refer to life, and the last two identify this as a life
beyond death; eternal life is probably at issue in the ﬁrst two as well. The author
has derived his ﬁnal citation from Deut. 32.39 and 30.20, which he here conﬂates:
     See now that I am, and there is no god but me. I shall kill and I shall make alive, I
     shall wound and I shall heal, and there is no-one who shall deliver from my hands.
     (Deut. 32.39)
     I bear witness to you this day, by heaven and earth: Life and death I have set before
     you, blessing and curse. Choose life, so that you may live, you and your seed, to love
     the Lord your God, to obey his voice and to be his possession; for this is your life and
     length of days, to dwell in the land which the Lord swore to give to your fathers,
     Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. (Deut. 30.19–20)

The author’s conﬂation of the two Deuteronomy passages signiﬁcantly affects
their meaning. The phrase from Deuteronomy 30 originally referred to the pros-
perous life that the people will enjoy in the land if they obey the divine com-
mandments, but it is here transplanted into a context in which it refers instead to
a life beyond death – if we take ‘I shall kill and I shall make alive’ to refer to a
single object, ﬁrst put to death and then raised by the Lord. God has put the
martyrs to death in the sense that it is God’s law that requires them to die rather
than to transgress, but God has also made them alive by bestowing on them
‘souls holy and immortal’ (4 Macc. 18.23). The ‘life and length of days’ prom-
ised by the law is understood here as the eternal life of those who, beyond death,
‘live to God’ on the basis of their faithful observance of the law.

From a Pauline standpoint, 4 Maccabees clearly exempliﬁes a soteriology in
which law-observance leads to life – alongside 4QMMT and other texts. In Gala-
tians as in Romans, this soteriology is identiﬁed, its scriptural basis is acknowl-
edged, and yet it is rejected on the basis of the soteriology and hermeneutic
entailed by faith. While Galatians (or Romans) might lead us view 4QMMT and
4 Maccabees as fundamentally similar, in spite of obvious differences, it is worth
attempting the thought-experiment of setting up a genuinely three-sided relation-
ship between the three texts, and attempting to view each pair of texts from the
standpoint of the third. If 4QMMT and 4 Maccabees can be read from the per-
spective of Galatians, it should also be possible to read 4 Maccabees and Gala-
tians from the perspective of 4QMMT, and Galatians and 4QMMT from the
perspective of 4 Maccabees. The basis for the comparison is that all three texts
are concerned with the interpretation of similar pentateuchal material – drawn
especially from the closing chapters of Deuteronomy.
   From the standpoint of 4QMMT, Galatians and 4 Maccabees share a common
and perhaps dangerous predilection for the Greek language and the conceptuality
it makes available. There is a common concern to theorize about the law, for
example in the attempt to derive its essence and foundation from the command-
ments concerning love of neighbour or desire. This speculative concern leads
116                     Divine and Human Agency in Paul

both texts to neglect the practical concern to clarify the law’s precise content. In
4 Maccabees, it is apparently assumed that the ‘works of the law’ can straight-
forwardly be read off the surface of the biblical text, with no need for interpre-
tation or supplementation; in Galatians, the drift away from crucial questions
of halakhah has gone still further. Both texts ascribe great signiﬁcance to non-
scriptural martyr ﬁgures, about whom extravagant claims are made. And both
texts claim to ﬁnd the doctrine of individual immortality in the Torah, but are
relatively unconcerned about the attainment of the divine blessings in the life of
the nation.
    From the standpoint of 4 Maccabees, Galatians and 4QMMT exemplify a lack
of philosophical culture that can lead only to arbitrary and unfounded assertions.
Both texts are sectarian in nature, representing groups that have cut themselves
off from the mainstream of the national life either in the Land of Israel or in the
Dispersion. Their authors are radicals and fanatics determined to impose their
own idiosyncratic views on the moderate majority. Both authors give more weight
to their own views than to the law itself – one by supplementing it with a poten-
tially endless proliferation of new, authoritarian rulings, the other by subordinating
it to the so-called Christ. Both insist that these products of their own imaginings
represent the one truly valid reading of the law, and that all other readings are
false. Both fail to note the dignity bestowed on the human person by the law’s
address. They have, indeed, little concept of the human person as such, being
preoccupied instead with the great divide that separates the sect from the parent
religious body and from humankind as a whole. Finally, neither author has the
slightest idea how to construct a rational argument. If proof be needed of the
importance of philosophical education as a preliminary to scriptural interpreta-
tion, it may be found in the deﬁciencies of texts such as these.
    In each of these possible readings of two texts from the standpoint of a third,
one particular element is asserted as fundamental – faith in the case of Paul,
halakhah in the case of 4QMMT, philosophy in the case of 4 Maccabees – with
the result that the opposing texts are characterized by its lack. Thus texts that
appear to be very different from other perspectives come to look similar. Only
from a Pauline perspective does the issue of divine in relation to human agency
come to the fore.
    It is therefore inadequate to assume that Paul’s view of the law’s soteriology
(as articulated in Lev. 18.5) either does or does not correspond to the realities of
Second Temple Judaism as known to us from elsewhere. It is a matter of perspec-
tive, not of neutral statements about what is or is not the case. If and only if one is
convinced by the Pauline claim that the scriptural testimony points ultimately to
God’s saving act in Christ, then non-Christian Jewish texts will seem to be char-
acterized by the same deﬁcient soteriology, according to which law-observance is
the way to life. Once the great antithesis between divine and human agency has
been established, other variables may seem to fade into insigniﬁcance. Yet, out-
side a Pauline framework, these variables remain clearly visible. In their diversity,
these texts make it clear that Pauline antithesis is an interpretative construct
intended to serve the exposition of the gospel, not a neutral report about the
theology of Second Temple Judaism.
                                            Chapter 7

                    SELF-SUFFICIENCY AND POWER:
           DIVINE AND HUMAN AGENCY IN EPICTETUS AND PAUL

                                 Troels Engberg-Pedersen


                                          Introduction
Divine and human agency: what does the distinction mean? When the two types
of agency are played out against one another, do we have a clear contrast? And if
so, what is the contrast about? My aim in this essay is to tease out the meaning of
certain texts in Epictetus and Paul that appear to speak to the distinction. In this
way I hope to be able to clarify whether, and if so how, the distinction has a grip,
at least in these two thinkers.
    My approach will reﬂect an initial skepticism about asking an ancient text of
its view of the speciﬁc question of the relationship between divine and human
agency as if we knew beforehand exactly what that meant. The question of agency
asks about who does what and in what senses of ‘doing’ the supposed agent is
acting. The question of agency thus belongs within the theory of action. By
contrast, the question of the relationship between speciﬁcally divine and human
agency points in a different direction. Here the issue is rather one of theology.
Are human beings crucially dependent in their actions on God? And if so, how?
Or do we not need to bring in God to provide a satisfactory account of human
action? At the horizon of this way of asking lies the question whether God
ultimately exists. In antiquity the latter question was not a very important one. Of
course God exists!1 It is possible, therefore, that the question of speciﬁcally
divine and human agency understood in this theological sense is a fundamentally
post-ancient one. Perhaps the distinction will turn out not to have any real grip
in an ancient analysis of action but rather to have served as a weapon in a more
recent battle between ‘religion’ and ‘humanism’, Christianity and philosophy.
    Instead of proceeding further along the line of the distinction, as if we knew
beforehand precisely what it means, I propose to ask – with a view to a com-
parison of Epictetus and Paul – about the speciﬁc shape in either writer of the
interaction of divine and human beings as part of a comprehensive picture of the
basic features of human life and action as a whole. I shall ﬁrst look at Epictetus,


    1. Compare, for instance, Epictetus in Diss. 2.14.11–13, a text that is so relevant to Paul that it
is sad not to be able to quote it in extenso.
118                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

then turn to Paul and ﬁnally compare the two.2 As we know – I call it the lex
Malherbe – comparison in this ﬁeld requires a thorough knowledge of each ﬁgure
to be compared in his own right and on his own premises. I shall presuppose this
here for Paul, but need to present the essential shape of Epictetus’ understanding.


                                          1. Epictetus
a. Three Questions
In a striking passage, Diss. 4.1.99–104, that would deserve extensive comment,
Epictetus discusses what it means for a person to ‘attach himself to God’. The
answer lies in grasping that God has given everything one has, and in living
one’s life in relation to one’s body (and the rest of the world) and to God himself
in a manner that reﬂects that grasp. We may focus on various aspects of this
answer by asking three questions.
    (1) What is the relationship between God and human beings with respect to
human autonomy? In the middle of the passage (4.1.100), Epictetus distinguishes
between something God has ‘given me for my own and subject to my (own) power
(GOQ>P MCK> CWVGEQWUKQP)’ and something ‘He [has] left for Himself’, namely, on
the one hand, ‘the objects of choice (VCA RTQCKTGVKMC)’, which ‘He has made up
to me, unhampered and unhindered’ and, on the other, ‘my body (VQA UY`OC)’,
‘my property, my equipment, my house, my children, my wife’, which ‘He has
subjected (WRGVCEGP)…to the revolution of the universe’.3
    Here we ﬁnd the distinction that is central in Epictetus between what is ‘up to
me’ (GR  GOQK), ‘my own’ (GOQP) or ‘in my own power’ (CWVGEQWUKQP), namely,
whatever falls within the sphere of my own ‘choice’ (RTQCKTGUKL prohairesis) –
and all the rest, including my own body (UY`OC).4 The former half of this contrast

   2. The classic discussion of Epictetus’ ethics is A. Bonhöffer, Die Ethik des Stoikers Epictet
(Stuttgart, 1894; English trans. The Ethics of the Stoic Epictetus, trans. W. O. Stephens; New York:
Peter Lang, 1996). A splendid new contribution is A. A. Long, Epictetus. A Stoic and Socratic
Guide to Life (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002), with which I shall be in constant dialogue. On
Epictetus and the New Testament see in particular A. Bonhöffer, Epiktet und das Neue Testament
(Religions-geschichtliche Versuche und Vorarbeiten, 10; Giessen: Alfred Töpelmann, 1911) and
the discussion between R. Bultmann, ‘Das religiöse Moment in der ethischen Unterweisung des
Epiktet und das Neue Testament’, ZNW 13 (1912), pp. 97–110, 177–91 and A. Bonhöffer, ‘Epiktet
und das Neue Testament’, ZNW 13 (1912), pp. 281–92. Long, who rightly emphasizes the ‘theonomic
foundations’ of Epictetus’ ethics (e.g. Long, Epictetus, pp. 186–89), also has some remarks (pp.
145–47, especially 145) on ‘a number of radical differences’ from ‘the great monotheistic relig-
ions’, primarily Christianity. These remarks reveal the still current wide gap between the modern
study of ancient philosophy and the New Testament. My own aim is to do justice to both, which
will also lead to a very different picture from that of either Bultmann or Bonhöffer. With Bonhöffer,
Epiktet (passim) and Long, I shall presuppose that ‘in spite of numerous verbal afﬁnities’ between
Epictetus and the New Testament, ‘there are no decisive grounds for positing any direct inﬂuence
of one on the other’ (Long, Epictetus, p. 176). In fact, the actual similarities become far more
interesting on that presupposition.
   3. My own translation, which draws heavily on Oldfather (LCL). The remaining translations
from Epictetus have the same dual parentage.
   4. The term CWVGEQWUKQP is used in the following places: 2.2.3 and 4.1.56, 62, 68 and 100
                  ENGBERG-PEDERSEN Self-sufﬁciency and Power                                  119

is quite often identiﬁed by Epictetus under the concept of ‘freedom’ (GNGWSGTKC).5
But then, exactly how is the idea of human ‘freedom’, ‘self-power’ and ‘auton-
omy’ to be understood in Epictetus, not least if it is also correct – with A. A.
Long (see n. 2) – to speak of the ‘theonomic foundations’ of his thought? In
particular, does Epictetus’ idea of human freedom and autonomy contain ideas
that contrast with the picture of human agency vis-à-vis God that we ﬁnd in Paul?
    (2) What is the relationship between God and human beings with respect to
the human body? When Epictetus speaks in 4.1.100 of God’s having subjected
my body (plus my property, equipment etc.), or later (104) my ‘little portion of
paltry ﬂesh (QNKIQP UCTMKFKQP)’, under the revolution of the universe, is he
giving expression to an understanding of human embodiedness (as distinct from
the area of human freedom and autonomy) in relation to God that differs from
what we ﬁnd in Paul?
    (3) Finally, what is the relationship between God and human beings with
respect to the present world and human life in that? When Epictetus brings
together in 4.1.104 the two sides of the human being – that of the ‘mortal being’
(SPJVQP) who lives ‘with a little portion of paltry ﬂesh’ (cf. 2 above) but may also
act as a ‘spectator of God’s governance’ in virtue of having or being a prohairesis
(cf. 1 above) – into the idea of living in a manner described as ‘joining with God
in His pageant and festival’, is he giving expression to a manner of living in this
world in relation to God that differs from what we ﬁnd in Paul?

b. Epictetus: The Human Being in the Scala Naturae
The starting-point throughout is God. In addition to speaking of ‘theonomic
foundations’, A. A. Long is wholly right to speak of the basically ‘theological
orientation’ of Epictetus’ thought, and indeed of his ‘theist’ and ‘personalist’
conception of God.6 Within the world created by God, however, a special place
is reserved for human beings, ‘to whom God has made the additional gift of the
faculty of understanding (MCK> VJAP RCTCMQNQWSJVKMJAP FWPCOKP GFYMGP)’ (1.6.15).
Epictetus is fond of the term RCTCMQNQWSGKP (parakolouthein, ‘attend to’, ‘fol-
low in thought’).7 It identiﬁes the faculty of reason as a second-order capacity of
‘following’ in consciousness some other thing, for instance, the immediate kind
of information delivered (even to irrational animals) by the senses. In this way
reason is a critical faculty.8
    The result is that the human being may be described as belonging in two worlds,
as divided between ‘the body, which we have in common with the animals, and
reason (NQIQL) and opinion (IPYOJ), which we have in common with the gods’
(1.3.3). The two sides of the human being are not of equal value, of course. Rather,

quoted above. Long either leaves prohairesis untranslated or translates it as ‘volition’ (see Long,
Epictetus, pp. 218–20 for discussion). I prefer the translation ‘choice’.
  5. Cf. e.g. 4.1.56: Does freedom (GNGWSGTKC) seem to you to be something in your own power
(CWVGEQWUKQP) and self-governing (CWVQPQOQP)?
  6. Long, Epictetus, pp. 142 and 156; and ch. 6, pp. 142–79, as a whole.
  7. See, e.g., 1.6.12–22 as a whole; also, e.g., 1.28.20 and 2.8.6.
  8. Compare, e.g., 1.1.6 and 1.6.18 for the term FKCMTKPGKP.
120                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

‘we are all primarily (RTQJIQWOGPYL) begotten of God, and God is the father of
human beings as well as of gods’ (1.3.1). Human beings ‘alone share by nature
with God in common (and reciprocal) association with him (UWPCPCUVTQHJ),
being (reciprocally) intertwined (GRKRGRNGIOGPC) in accordance with reason
(MCVCA VQ>P NQIQP)’.9 In spite of this emphasis on the special kinship (UWIIGPGKC,
2.8.11) of human beings with God, however, the bodily side remains in the picture.
It is not highly valued in itself.10 Still, the body too is the result of God’s creation
and part of God’s created order. In this ontological picture, then, there is a strong
asymmetry between the two sides of the human being. But there is no rigid
dualism.

c. Epictetus: Prohairesis
Things look different when we move on to bring in Epictetus’ peculiar notion of
the true human self. That is a more restricted notion than the one of the human
being considered so far. And it involves a genuine anthropological dualism. Epic-
tetus never himself speaks of a ‘true human self’, but there are passages, as we
shall see, where he comes close to doing so.11 Instead, his anthropological dualism
focuses on the notion of prohairesis. The true human self is that of prohairesis.
In a way everything we need to say on Epictetus in this essay falls under an
elucidation of different sides of the notion of prohairesis.
   Let us rapidly identify the most important of these sides.
   Prohairesis is a FWPCOKL (faculty, capacity) that is very closely related to
the FWPCOKL of parakolouthêsis, but it is not just identical with it. What makes
the ‘parakolouthic’ faculty ‘prohairetic’ is the fact that it focuses on the value
(RQUQW…CEKC, 2.23.11) of a thing and the concomitant question of whether to
act in relation to it, how to do it, at what time etc. (2.23.11–15).
   A further feature of prohairesis is that having this or the other prohairesis
(making this or the other choice) is entirely ‘up to us’. Prohairesis is ‘by nature’
free from hindrances (CMYNWVQP) and constraint (CPCPCIMCUVQP, 1.17.21). This
feature is derived from a characteristic that prohairesis shares with assent, desire
and impulse: that they are all so many different forms of a belief (FQIOC), and a
belief is wholly one’s own. ‘It is your own belief (FQIOC) which compelled you,
that is, (one) prohairesis (another) prohairesis’ (1.17.26).
   A third feature of prohairesis follows directly from this: that it gives mastery
or power. A human being is ‘one who has nothing more masterful (or powerful,
MWTKYVGTQP) than prohairesis (= the prohairetic faculty), but has everything else
subjected (WRQVGVCIOGPQP) to that, and this prohairesis itself free from slavery
(CFQWNGWVQP) and subjection (CPWRQVCMVQP)’ (namely, to anything other than
one’s own prohairesis, 2.10.1).

   9. Epictetus is probably quoting here from some earlier Stoic, but with full endorsement. For
the notion of ‘the seeds of being’ having ‘fallen down’ ‘primarily’ to human beings see 1.9.4. And
for its consequence that all human beings are ‘brothers’ as ‘sons from the same seed’ see 1.13.3.
   10. See, e.g., 1.9.11 together with 1.9.16–17.
   11. Long, too, speaks in connection with prohairesis of ‘the self, what each of us is, as abstracted
from the body’ and rightly says that Epictetus’ ‘conception of human beings is dualistic’ (Epictetus,
p. 28). Elsewhere (pp. 29, 159, 237) he uses the phrase ‘our essential selves’.
                  ENGBERG-PEDERSEN Self-sufﬁciency and Power                                   121

   A fourth feature of prohairesis is that it involves a strong idea of the self.
Speaking of the ‘things that fall outside the sphere of prohairesis’ (they are
CRTQCKTGVC), Epictetus says that they are ‘nothing to me’ (QWFG>P RTQ>L GOG,
1.30.3). By contrast, ‘you are not ﬂesh, nor hair, but prohairesis’ (3.1.40).
   Here we have the true human self. It is a genuine self, which stands in a clear
and unmediated contrast with everything else in the world, even the person’s own
body. The reason why Epictetus has such a heightened awareness of the self in
comparison with other Stoics is probably that he focuses so strongly on the
human freedom of mind which translates directly into the notion of individual
mastery and power. For this intrinsic connection of a heightened awareness of
self with freedom of mind and mastery, even in relation to one’s own body, see,
for instance, 1.19.8–9.
   I have already claimed that this notion of the true human self implies a genu-
ine dualism. But note two things. First, what is contrasted with the world is the
human self in the form of prohairesis as we have treated this so far: as the purely
formal capacity for deciding and choosing for oneself how to evaluate experi-
ences of the world and how to react to them. Second, what is contrasted is only
the individual human being (who of course has a body etc.) to the extent that he
or she has completely identiﬁed with the formal capacity and with that alone.
   This leads to a ﬁfth feature of prohairesis, which is now a matter of the sub-
stantive result in each individual of his or her actual use of the formal capacity.
In addition to speaking of prohairesis as a formal capacity, Epictetus may also
call a prohairesis ‘bad’ (MCMJ, e.g. 2.1.6). A bad prohairesis is one that is false or
wrong in its ascription of evaluative properties to the impressions the person has
received from the world (1.29.3, 3.3.19). Correspondingly, a prohairesis may
be good (CICSJ, 1.29.3) or morally right (MCNJ, 3.1.41). That happens when its
evaluative judgements are correct (QTSC, 1.29.3), and this means: when people
place the good (VQ> CICSQP) in the correct (QTSJ) prohairesis itself (3.3.8), when
they judge that the goods (VCA CICSC) consist in ‘a prohairesis as it should be
(QKC FGK) and (the proper) use of external impressions’ (1.30.4). Thus a substan-
tive prohairesis (an individual person’s moral choice) is ‘good’ and ‘morally
right’ if and only if it maintains the formal capacity for freedom and mastery that
the prohairetic faculty is, the capacity that is always one’s own, in one’s own
power and gives one authority (GEQWUKC, ‘power’) over oneself in the matters of
good and evil.12

d. Epictetus: Prohairesis and the Human Relationship with the Body and the
World
With such an understanding of prohairesis, exactly how should we characterize
the relationship with one’s own body and the world at large in the person whose
prohairesis is the correct one? There are two things to be said here. The ﬁrst
ﬂows directly from the precise character of the freedom and self-mastery that

   12. See 4.12.7–8, ending in the strong claim that GIYA CWVQ>L GOCWVQW` MCVCA VCWVC GEQWUKCP
GZY OQPQL (‘I myself alone have authority over myself in these matters’).
122                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

goes with the notion of prohairesis. If one asks about the degree of direct, in
the sense of wholly un-mediated, engagement in or concern with one’s body or
the world at large, Epictetus’ answer is that one should ‘eradicate desire utterly’
and ‘pursue none of the things external’.13 This is the famous Stoic doctrine of
apatheia (freedom from passion). In its most overt meaning, which it never loses,
it stands for a stark disengagement from one’s body and the world. Thus Epic-
tetus at one point insists that one must never give up the principle of not
‘depending’ on (MTGOCUSCK in the sense of being ‘wholly taken up with’) any-
thing other than oneself (GE CNNQW, 3.24.58). This is the feature of prohairesis in
relation to one’s body and the world that is most directly relevant to the theme of
this essay. Do we not here ﬁnd the kind of stark self-sufﬁciency that theologians,
at least, are prepared to connect with a notion of speciﬁcally human agency?
    However, the second thing to be said is that, even with regard to the body and
the world, the principle of freedom and non-dependence is rather more complex
than it sounds. In a moment we shall see that it does not in the least exclude a
close relationship with God. But of more immediate relevance to one’s living in
the world is the fact that the principle of non-dependence does not in the least
exclude an attitude of real care and love for other human beings, that is, of being
genuinely ‘affectionate’ (HKNQUVQTIQL) towards them either.14 The traditional
view that Epictetus’ fundamentally Stoic form of self-sufﬁciency somehow
excludes caring for and loving other human beings is just wrong. He himself
addresses the issue head-on, e.g. in 1.19.11–15: ‘This [attitude he is arguing for] is
not self-love (HKNCWVQP)’. Unfortunately, one needs to consider the whole Stoic
theory of oikeiôsis (with which Epictetus himself ends in the quoted passage:
1.19.15) in order to grasp this.15
    With this account we have already approached the issue of the relationship of
the true human self in the other direction, with God. The true human self is both
free and also ‘a servant of’ God and indeed ‘subject unto’ God (3.24.65). How is
this combination to be understood? If we now understand Epictetus’ view of the
true human self and the relationship with the body and the world (compare our
initial questions 2 and 3) that is involved in identifying with one’s prohairesis,
then what relationship with God and divine agency (question 1) is involved in
this self-identiﬁcation? In what sense is the true human self self-sufﬁcient vis-à-
vis God?

e. Epictetus: Prohairesis and the Human Relationship with God
We may sharpen the issue like this. In a number of passages Epictetus states that
the freedom that goes with a correct, substantive prohairesis is so absolute that it
places the true human self on a par with God; see, for example, 4.1.81–82 (with
4.1.90), 1.12.26–27 (with 1.12.21) and 2.19.26–27. At the same time Epictetus
also introduces an idea of dependence on God; see, for example, 2.17.23–29,

   13. Cf., e.g., 4.4.33 and 4.12.15.
   14. This is, rightly, a recurrent theme in Long, Epictetus, not least in ch. 9 (pp. 231–58).
   15. For two passages that directly connect the relationship with God and others see 3.24.60 and
3.24.64–65, in which Epictetus speaks of his two heroes, Socrates and Diogenes.
                 ENGBERG-PEDERSEN Self-sufﬁciency and Power                                       123

where he enjoins his audience to let ‘Zeus and the other gods…exercise the
control (GMGKPQK MWDGTPCVYUCP)’ over their desires (25), ending like this:
     I am satisﬁed (CTMGK F [GOQK]) if I shall be free (GEGUVCK) to live untrammelled and
     untroubled, to hold up my neck (CPCVGKPCK VQ>P VTCZJNQP) in the face of facts (RTQ>L
     VCA RTCIOCVC) like a free man (YL GNGWSGTQP) and to look up to heaven (GKL VQ>P
     QWTCPQ>P CPCDNGRGKP) as a friend of God, without fear of what may possibly happen.

How should we understand this combination of a notion of genuine human self-
sufﬁciency, where the human being is said to be on a par with God, and the idea
of letting Zeus and the other gods exercise control, which seems to imply that
one subjects oneself to them? Again, is the person who has identiﬁed completely
with the true human self also completely self-sufﬁcient in relation to God? Is the
same person not in any way dependent on God?
    If we recall the precise content of the true human self, we can see that with
respect to the relationship with God the dichotomy between self-sufﬁciency and
dependence is a false one. In relation to the world and one’s own body, the true
human self is completely self-sufﬁcient and non-dependent by possessing under-
standing, which cannot be forced by anything other than the way the person
him- or herself actually sees things. But then, God too is essentially a possessor
of understanding. God is the kind of rationality that permeates the world. Thus
the only difference between the rationality of the true human self and that of God
is one of scope. If this is the underlying picture, the true human self cannot be
self-sufﬁcient in relation to God in the way it is in fact self-sufﬁcient in relation
to the world. How could a local case of understanding close itself off from the
wider rationality of the world as a whole? Nor can we say that the true human
self is dependent on God in the sense of dependence according to which the true
human self is not dependent on the world. In being open to the wider rationality
of the world, how could a local case of understanding differ from that wider ration-
ality in anything other than scope? Instead of speaking of either self-sufﬁciency
or dependence of the true human self in relation to God, we need a different con-
ception, one that brings out that the true human self and God lie on a single scale
but at different ends of the scale with regard to comprehensiveness or scope. The
ﬁrst fact makes them qualitatively identical, the second renders them quantita-
tively different. We shall see in a moment that Epictetus does have a term for
such a conception. He speaks in relation to human beings of VGVCUSCK, which we
may render as ‘directedness’ (being stretched out or directed towards, being intent
upon). The Greek term elegantly captures two different dimensions of Epictetus’
talk of God, his personalist conception and the underlying physicalist one (see
more below). The true human self will be personally intent upon God. But the
true human self will also be stretched out physicalistically towards the all-
comprehending structure of the whole world which is also God. Instead of
speaking of self-sufﬁciency or dependence of the true human self vis-à-vis God,
we should speak rather of directedness.
    Note once more that in this analysis we have been talking not of the individual
self just like that, but of the true human self, and thus only of the individual self
or person to the extent that this person has identiﬁed with the true human self of
124                       Divine and Human Agency in Paul

prohairesis. It is this self that is directed towards God. The sense in which this
self and God lie on a single continuous line is so strong that it is difﬁcult, in the
ﬁnal outcome, to draw a clear line between them (cf. e.g., 2.18.19 and 4.4.47).
Thus when Epictetus discusses, in a very interesting text (1.14) that would
deserve detailed analysis, the relationship between a number of entities: the self
(or person who is being addressed), each person’s ‘particular daemon’ within
the person (1.14.12), ‘God within’ (as a being who is apparently different from
the daemon, 1.14.14) and the outside God, he ends up (1.14.15–16) more or less
identifying the outside God with the person him- or herself. What does that
mean? The best reading seems to be that when Epictetus speaks of the person,
what he has in mind is precisely not this or that individual self but rather what we
have called the true human self and what A. A. Long calls ‘the ideally rational
and normative self’.16 In connection with this self there is neither self-sufﬁciency
vis-à-vis God (as there is towards the world) nor dependence on him (in the sense
there is not towards the world). Instead, there is a directedness towards him that
reﬂects a qualitative identity with him.

f. Epictetus: A Personalist (and Physicalist) Conception of God – And a
Cognitivist One
This relationship of the true human self with God reﬂects Epictetus’ special
conception of God. It is ﬁrst of all a personalist one. God has personally acted
with regard to the individual (see, e.g., the striking formulations in 2.8.21–23)
and Epictetus himself paradigmatically responds (3.24.114):
      When I have been appointed (MCVCVGVCIOGPQL) to such a service (WRJTGUKCP), am I
      any longer to take thought as to where I am, or with whom, or what men say about
      me? Am I not wholly intent upon God (QNQL RTQ>L VQ>P SGQ>P VGVCOCK), and his
      commands (GPVQNCL) and ordinances (RTQUVCIOCVC)?

    However, Epictetus’ conception of God is also a physicalist one even though,
as Long notes, he only rarely alludes to the Stoic, physicalist worldview.17 But
he does do it a sufﬁcient number of times to indicate that it was his, too.
    Much more important is the conclusion we may draw from our analysis of the
relationship – in terms of supposed self-sufﬁciency and/or dependence – of the
true human self with God. What we saw there was that God is essentially ration-
ality and that the question of understanding the relationship between God and
human beings turns on the relationship between rationality as present in the
world as a whole and far more locally in individual human beings. We saw that
the two forms of rationality are qualitatively identical but quantitatively different.
In addition to a personalist and a physicalist conception of God, we may there-
fore also speak of a cognitivist one. Moreover, it is this conception of God that is
Epictetus’ central concern, as becomes clear, for instance, in 1.14 where he
speaks of the self, the ‘daemon within’, ‘God within’ and the outside God and
ends up more or less identifying them all.


  16. Long, Epictetus, p. 166.
  17. Long, Epictetus, pp. 148–49.
                ENGBERG-PEDERSEN Self-sufﬁciency and Power                      125

   With this conclusion we are ﬁnally ready to ask about the meaningfulness of
speaking of divine and human agency in Epictetus.

g. Divine and Human Agency in Epictetus
Does the distinction between these two types of agency have a grip in Epictetus?
If we go by the personalist story from which we began, it seems that the answer
should be positive. God has created and fashioned the world and everything in
it, including human beings. In so doing, he has given them certain capacities.
Human beings, therefore, must respond by using these capacities to their full
extent. God has given and human beings should respond. This whole perspective
would itself seem to trade on the distinction.
    A similar conclusion might be drawn when one considers the theme on which
Epictetus spends most of his time: what it is that God has given to human beings,
in particular. God has given the ‘parakolouthic’ faculty, and indeed the faculty of
prohairesis, but in such a way that it is now wholly their own: ‘He has put the
whole matter under our control without reserving even for Himself any power
whatever (QWF CWVY^` VKPCA KUZWP ) to hinder or prevent’ (1.6.40).
    This is as stark an expression as anyone could wish of the notion of human
self-sufﬁciency and ‘self-power’ (VQ> CWVGEQWUKQP). So, do we not here have the
idea of human agency, originally given to human beings by God and thus in its
origin reﬂecting divine agency, but now distinctly a matter of human agency and
nothing else? Is this not something that human beings now have, even over
against God?
    No. The burden of my argument has been that such a conclusion would be
completely wrong. Rather, the claim that God has given human beings the faculty
of prohairesis as something that is wholly under their own control is only the
beginning of the story. All the material we have discussed – the precise logical
shape of prohairesis, the ideas of mastery and the self, the relationship of the true
human self with the body and the world and with God – goes towards showing
that in Epictetus no distinction can be maintained between something to be called
divine agency and something to be called human agency. On the contrary, the
elucidation of the true human self showed that the divine and the human lie at
either end of a single scale with the human being directed towards the divine and
the divine, conversely, on its cognitivist conception being qualitatively identical
with the true human self or ‘the ideally rational or normative self’.18
    The secret lies in seeing that Epictetus is throughout fundamentally speaking
of cognition. Once we focus – as Epictetus himself so strongly does – on the
cognitive content of what God has given to human beings for their own, viz.
the faculty of prohairesis, we can see that there is a kind of logical movement in
the story. It goes from ‘God has given’ (and human beings should respond accord-
ingly) to ‘it’s all their own’ – and from there to this: there is no distinction of
agency between divine and human; on the contrary, the ‘agency’ of God and that
of the true human self is one and the same since the theme itself of Epictetus’ talk


  18. Long, Epictetus, p. 166, my emphasis.
126                       Divine and Human Agency in Paul

of divine gift and human ‘self-power’ is cognition. All three moments of the story
are there and should be left standing. But the third is the one to which Epictetus
gives his most sustained effort since this is where it becomes clear what he is
most fundamentally talking about. Within this framework, then, the distinction
between divine and human agency has no grip.
   With regard to self-sufﬁciency and power, however, we should conclude that
in relation to the body and the rest of the world, there both is and should be,
according to Epictetus, a complete self-sufﬁciency in human beings: a disengage-
ment or turning one’s back on those things, which does not, however, exclude the
kind of mediated engagement and concern with the body, the world and the others
that we have noted. In relation to God, there also is self-sufﬁciency in human
beings, not, however, in the sense of disengagement with or turning one’s back on
God. On the contrary, it is the self-sufﬁciency of being (ultimately) at one with
God.

                                          2. Paul
Turning now to Paul, we may move fairly rapidly to the central issue of the
possible meaning in the apostle of the distinction between divine and human
agency. If we bring in the notion of self-sufﬁciency that played such an important
role in connection with Epictetus, we shall ﬁnd that with regard to the body and
the world, at least, fundamentally the same picture may be found in Paul. When he
says, in Gal. 5.24, that ’those who belong to Christ Jesus have cruciﬁed the ﬂesh
together with its passions and desires’, he is giving expression to the same kind of
radical disengagement from the body that is a constantly recurrent theme in
Epictetus. And when he says, in Gal. 5.14, that through Jesus Christ (or his cross)
‘the world (MQUOQL) has been cruciﬁed vis-à-vis me (GOQK) and I vis-à-vis the
world’, he is giving expression to the same kind of disengagement from the world
at large as we found in Epictetus. Furthermore, Paul’s talk of ‘belonging to Christ
Jesus’ already suggests that this disengagement from the body and the world is the
other side of some kind of unity with God, as was the case in Epictetus, too.
    There is perhaps nothing very strange about this comprehensive similarity
between the two patterns of thought. It reﬂects the idea of a directedness towards
God which lies at the heart of either pattern, as we shall see for Paul, too. Still,
the similarity is of such fundamental importance for everything that is said by
the two writers that it immediately sets a certain parameter for any further com-
parison and any dissimilarities one may come across.
    One point of similarity that follows from the fundamental one should just be
mentioned in passing. In both patterns there is plenty of room for concern for
others.19 Indeed, such concern is in both cases derived from the directedness
towards God.
    This brings us immediately to the much more taxing question of the exact
shape in Paul of the human relationship with God and Christ and, indeed, of his

   19. I have argued this more broadly in ‘The Relationship with Others: Similarities and Dif-
ferences Between Paul and Stoicism’, ZNW 96 (2005), pp. 35–60.
                   ENGBERG-PEDERSEN Self-sufﬁciency and Power                                    127

whole conception of God. Here, surely, we shall ﬁnd some important differences
from Epictetus? Both yes and no. Let us focus our efforts on this issue. In the
greater part of the ensuing discussion, I shall discuss a number of important texts
in Paul in which the idea of a distinction between divine and human agency
seems to be explicitly drawn upon. These motifs are directly a part of Paul’s own
discourse. They express his own perspective and thus reﬂect the supposed dis-
tinction as seen from within. I aim to consider whether it is possible to develop a
coherent picture of the many different sides of the relationship between divine
and human agency that seems to be invoked within this perspective. One cannot
take it for granted that there is such a picture. As always in Paul, the rhetorical
purpose of each particular passage lies uppermost. Still, there seems to be enough
consistency at the uppermost, rhetorical level to make it worth attempting to
articulate a more comprehensive picture.
   At the end of this attempt I shall make a comparison with Epictetus, where
we did ﬁnd a consistent picture, and point out both similarities and dissimilari-
ties. Here we shall see that the comparison with Epictetus helps us to diagnose
a certain tension in the understanding of God within Paul’s thought itself. In
some respects he is thinking of God in a manner that is closely comparable with
Epictetus’ way of thinking, in others not.
   All through, however, the underlying question and the proposed answer are
the same: that nothing like a fundamental and radical opposition between some-
thing called divine and human agency is involved in all this; neither Epictetus nor
Paul is aiming to contrast the two types of agency in any of the ways in which
this has been done in later thought, both within theology itself and in the battle
between theology and humanism or (non-theological) philosophy;20 on the con-
trary, in both writers the two types of agency interweave in numerous and com-
plex ways that together point towards an idea of the alignment of one with the
other, rather than contrast.

a. Transferrals of Agency
In ﬁve texts Paul performs what I shall call a ‘transferral of agency’. Here are the
texts:21
      1 (Gal. 4.8–11). (9) Now, however, having got to know God (IPQPVGL SGQP), or rather
      (OCNNQP FG>) having been known by God (IPYUSGPVGL WRQ> SGQW ).22
      2 (1 Cor. 8.1–4) (2) If somebody believes (GK VKL FQMGK) that he has got to know
      (GIPYMGPCK) something, he has not known (GIPY) it the way he should know it (MCSYAL


   20. Within theology the most famous form of the contrast is the one between human ‘faith’
(RKUVKL), to be seen as essentially initiated by God, and human ‘works’ (GTIC), which are con-
ceived as being essentially initiated by human beings. This contrast underlies Francis Watson’s
stimulating recent contributions to the debate, both in this volume and in Paul and the
Hermeneutics of Faith (London and New York: T&T Clark International, 2004).
   21. Translations of Paul are my own all through.
   22. Note in this passage that the Galatians’ having been ‘known by God’ apparently does not
exclude that Paul himself has been mightily operative as an agent, too (v. 11). Indeed, he has ‘strug-
gled’ with them. This duality is expressed even more clearly in 1 Cor. 15.9–10 (passage 6) quoted
below.
128                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

      FGK IPY`PCK).23 (3) But if somebody loves (CICRC^) God, then this man has been
      known by Him (GIPYUVCK WR  CWVQW ).24
      3 (Phil. 3.12–16) (12) I hunt for it if only I can grasp it (MCVCNCDY), just as I have
      also been grasped (MCVGNJOHSJP) by Christ Jesus. (13) Brothers, I do not reckon that
      I have grasped it myself.25 But this I do: forgetting (GRKNCPSCPGUSCK) about what lies
      behind (QRKUY), and stretching out (GRGMVGKPGUSCK) instead towards what lies before
      (GORTQUSGP), (14) I hunt towards the goal (UMQRQL), the prize of God’s upward calling
      (MNJUKL) in Christ Jesus.
      4 (1 Cor. 13.12) Up to now I know (IKPYUMGKP) in part (only); but then I shall know
      fully (GRKIPYUQOCK), just as I have also been fully known (GRGIPYUSJP).26
      5 (1 Cor. 4.6–7) (7) For who makes you something special? What do you possess
      (GZGKL) that you did not receive (GNCDGL)? And if you did receive it (GNCDGL), why do
      you boast (MCWZCUCK) of it as if you had not received it (YL OJA NCDYP)?

   Let us note the following points about these texts.
   First, and most obviously, they are saying that God has acted and some human
beings have re-acted.
   Second, and very importantly, the texts are speaking of how those human
beings have acquired knowledge of God (or Christ for text 3). The theme is one
of cognition, of the acquisition of knowledge.27 Paul is speaking of the way in
which, in conversion, his addressees have come to ‘know God’ as a result of
God’s ‘knowing them’ at that very moment. We may suppose that he is relying
here on what in modern philosophical terminology has become a distinction
between two types of knowledge: (i) knowledge by (direct) acquaintance and (ii)
propositional knowledge or knowledge that (something is thus and so). His idea
may be that in conversion human beings have acquired propositional knowledge
of what God is like based on direct acquaintance with God, moreover a kind of
acquaintance that has been brought about by God himself.
   Third, in answer to the question of how God has brought this about, we may
guess that with regard to Paul’s addressees (cf. texts 1 and 2) God has acted,

   23. Clearly, the perfect (GIPYMC, GIPYMGPCK) of IKPYUMGKP, which I have translated ‘get to
know’, must have a pregnant meaning here. Is the point one that would have come out more
explicitly if Paul had written GK VKL FQMGK CWVQ>L GIPYMGPCK VK (‘if somebody believes that he has
himself got to know something’)? Probably not. 1 Cor. 3.18–19 has the same phrase ‘If somebody
believes (GK VKL FQMGK) that he is wise (UQHQL)’ and here the contrast is explicitly stated to be one
between what counts as knowledge with God and in the world. Anticipating a little, we may there-
fore take it that in 8.2, rather than opposing a peculiar ‘oneself’ to God, Paul is claiming that a way
of understanding that is not God’s knowledge, but one that belongs instead to this world alone – is
not in fact (genuine) knowledge.
   24. This sentence, then, does raise the issue of divine agency.
   25. Viz. as contrasted with Paul’s interlocutors.
   26. Note the predicate ‘fully’ here (GRK-) and the time difference. Paul has apparently already
been fully known, but will only himself come to know fully in the future. What does that mean?
   27. This holds for text 5, too. (i) The overall theme of 1 Cor 1.10–4.21 is the question of who
has the proper knowledge of God, Paul or those Corinthians he is addressing. (ii) 4:7 in text 5
repeats the essential content of 3.18–23 half a page earlier, where the theme is explicitly that of who
has the proper kind of knowledge or wisdom (UQHKC), the one to be found ‘with God’ as opposed to
this world (3.18–19). The person who has this knowledge will never ‘boast among human beings’
(3.21), and that is precisely what the person criticized in 4.7 does. (iii) Through its connection with
3.18–23, text 5 is also fairly clearly connected with text 2, as we already noted.
                   ENGBERG-PEDERSEN Self-sufﬁciency and Power                                     129

among other things, by sending Paul as an apostle to them, proclaiming what
God has (also) done to the world in the form of the Christ event. With regard to
Paul himself (cf. texts 3 and 4) God has, among other things, literally shown
Christ to him (cf. texts 6 and 7 below).
   Fourth, the shape of the human knowledge of God takes the form of a direct-
edness towards God (cf. text 3) that literally leaves any earthly concerns behind
(cf. Phil. 3.19–20 just after text 3). This directedness is both a matter of inten-
tionality (cf. the talk of ‘hunting for the goal’ in text 3) and involves an under-
standing of the self as belonging with Christ and God (cf. Phil. 3.7–9 just before
text 3).
   Fifth, we should never forget that Paul has a clear rhetorical purpose in all
these texts, which is to place a truth-claim for the knowledge of God that he,
Paul, is himself articulating towards his addressees. When they have come to
know God (text 1) – namely, in the way Paul is articulating – then they have been
known by God: then it is God’s own knowledge (of himself) that they have been
made able to grasp.

b. Divine Agency in Conversion
In addition to the ﬁve texts that perform a transferral of agency with regard to the
generation of knowledge, there are two texts that recall Paul’s own conversion
without explicitly tying it together with issues of knowledge. Instead, it seems,
Paul is more concerned here about emphasizing divine agency on its own. Should
we take it, then, that Paul may speak of divine agency on human beings in ways
that are not intrinsically connected with imparting knowledge? In fact not, as we
shall see.
      6 (1 Cor. 15.7–11) (10) By the gift (ZCTKVK) of God, however, I am what I am; and His
      gift towards me did not become inefﬁcient (MGPJ), on the contrary (CNNCA) I have
      struggled (GMQRKCUC) more than them all – not I (myself), however (QWM GIYA FG>), but
      God’s gift together with me (UW>P GOQK).28
      7 (Gal. 1.11–17) (12) For I have neither had it transmitted (to me, RCTGNCDQP) from
      some (other) human being (RCTCA CPSTYRQW), nor have I had it taught (to me,
      GFKFCZSJP), but (I have received it) through (FKCA) a revelation (CRQMCNW[KL) of Jesus
      Christ … (15) But when God decided – He who set me apart from my mother’s womb
      and who called (MCNGUCL) me through (FKCA) his gift (ZCTKL) – (16) to reveal (CRQ–
      MCNW[CK) His son in (or to) me.

   Two points very brieﬂy about these passages. First, Paul is once more clearly
making the rhetorical move of backing his own knowledge of God up with a
claim about what God, on his side, has done. Second, on closer inspection these
two texts, too, are very much about the imparting of knowledge. Exactly what
has God done to Paul? In what does his gift consist? The simple answer must be

   28. There are two transmitted versions of the last phrase: (i) …CNNCA J ZCTKL VQW SGQW UW>P
GOQK and (ii) …CNNCA J ZCTKL VQW SGQW J UW>P GOQK. The former text, which is the one I have
adopted, is better attested. Also, one can perhaps explain the latter text as an emendation to prevent
anyone from thinking that Paul was contrasting God’s ZCTKL and himself. As we shall see, how-
ever, the emendation was unnecessary since Paul himself precisely did not think in terms of such a
contrast.
130                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

that God has revealed Christ to Paul in a vision. Christ was ‘seen by’ Paul (text 6,
15.8), and the gospel preached by Paul was revealed to him directly by God (text
7, 1.12, 16). Moreover, the last act presumably constitutes the very content of
God’s having ‘called’ Paul ‘through His gift’ (1.15). Thus in this context God’s
gift is very much a matter of cognition, of God’s concretely doing something to a
person so that the person will understand. In itself this claim is not very surpris-
ing. After all, receiving a revelation is necessarily about coming to understand
something. But we need the point that Paul’s talk of God’s activity vis-à-vis
human beings is primarily concerned with questions of cognition.
   We may add one point from text 7 to the picture we obtained from texts 1–5:
that God has set Paul aside from the very beginning of his life as a future recipi-
ent of God’s gift of cognition. This point raises the question of predetermination,
which will come up importantly in the later texts.

c. Divine Agency vis-à-vis Non-Christ-Believers
Two texts from Romans (texts 8 and 9) broaden the picture considerably. Here
Paul is speaking of non-Christ-believing Gentiles (text 8) and non-Christ-believ-
ing Jews (text 9), and he is both going back to the creation of the world (text 8)
and looking forward to an unspeciﬁed future time (end of Romans 11, not quoted
in text 9).
      8 (Rom. 1.18–21) speaking of the way Gentiles had in fact come to know God (21) on
      the basis of God’s having made manifest to them what may be known of God (19) –
      but without glorifying Him and giving Him thanks (21).
      9 (Rom. 8.28–30, 9.6–12, 9.16–24, 10.12–11.7) speaking of the way God has chosen
      those whom He has known beforehand (8.28–30), including only some Jews (9.6–12),
      since His is the power (GEQWUKC, 9.21) to choose whomever He wishes (9.16–24) and to
      call them through His apostles (10.12–15), the result being only a small remnant of Jews
      who have been elected through God’s gift while the rest were hardened (10.16–11.7).

   Three rapid points about these rich texts.
   First, all through when he speaks of what God has done – and will further do
(cf. 2.1–11) – Paul is concerned with the transmission of knowledge of God.
   Second, in a way God is himself responsible for the human lack of under-
standing since he has himself chosen – and chosen beforehand – those who will
understand.
   Third, that does not mean, however, that they are not also themselves respon-
sible for their lack of understanding. They most decidedly are, as Paul goes out
of his way to emphasize (e.g. 1.20–21 and 2.1).
   We may take it from both texts 8 and 9 that Paul saw the possibility of claim-
ing human non-responsibility on the basis of his own insistence on God’s pre-
disposing people to grasp or miss the signs of the true nature of the world that
God has himself given. We may also take it that Paul explicitly rejected this
possibility. The fascinating question that is raised by this state of affairs is how
we should understand Paul’s insistence on both divine predetermination and
human responsibility. Since he cannot have seen a contradiction in this insistence,
the question becomes one of constructing a sense of either claim that will allow us
                  ENGBERG-PEDERSEN Self-sufﬁciency and Power                                      131

to insist on both. We shall address this question below when we summmarize the
Pauline picture.

d. Divine and Human Agency After Conversion
The two last texts to be quoted bring us from divine agency vis-à-vis non-Christ-
believers via divine agency in conversion to divine agency in Christ-believers
themselves after conversion. Here we shall again meet some of our earlier motifs,
but also particularly strongly the idea of what I shall from now on call an overlap
of divine and human agency. This idea may also underlie the insistence we noted
on both divine predetermination and human responsibility. If divine and human
agency overlap in the situations described by Paul, the risk of an inconsistency
in speaking of divine predetermination and human responsibility will tend to
evaporate.
   Here are the two texts:
      10 (1 Thess. 2.13) For that reason too, we thank God unceasingly: that having had
      transmitted (to you) from us God’s word of proclamation (NQIQP CMQJL), you re-
      ceived it as what it genuinely is, not a word of human beings (NQIQP CPSTYRYP), but
      God’s word (NQIQP SGQW), which is also in operation (GPGTIGKUSCK) in (GP) you who
      believe.
      11 (Phil. 2.12–13) (12) Work energetically (MCVGTIC\GUSG) with fear and trembling on
      your own salvation (VJ>P GCWVY`P UYVJTKCP); (13) for (ICAT) it is God who is at work
      in you (GPGTIY`P GP [!] WOKP) making you both will (SGNGKP) and work (GPGTIGKP) in
      accordance with his wish.

    We might repeat here a number of the points we have already made. In par-
ticular, we might insist that here too Paul’s theme is in fact that of knowledge of
God.29 However, what is added in these two texts is the claim that God (or his
word) continues to be at work in believers.
    It is not stated exactly how this occurs. In the Thessalonians passage it may be
that Paul is referring to the understanding that is implied in the word itself once
it has been ‘received’ in the proper way. Such an understanding may well be ‘at
work in’ the Thessalonians. Alternatively, he may have had in mind already here
an idea that we ﬁnd elsewhere to the effect that Christ-believers have the spirit
(RPGWOC) ‘in’ them, working in the ways it sees ﬁt.30 That would ﬁt the quite
active sense of ‘being at work’ (GPGTIGKVCK). However, what matters most for
our purposes is the fact that already in this early text we are given a picture of
something coming from God that is active within believers, in and through their


   29. (i) Receiving (in the Thessalonians’ case) the word of the proclamation as God’s word is a
matter of understanding. (ii) And when God makes the Philippians both ‘will’ and ‘work’ in accor-
dance with his wish, he is presumably achieving this end through their own GRKIPYUKL (insight)
and every CKUSJUKL (perception, see Phil. 1.9) so that they may FQMKOC\GKP … VCA FKCHGTQPVC
(discern the differences) and become irreproachable on the day of Christ (1.10) to the glory and
praise of God (1.11).
   30. There is no developed philosophy of the RPGWOC in 1 Thessalonians, but Paul does pre-
suppose its presence (5.19) and there is a tantalizingly brief ‘anthropology’ in 5.23, where Paul
divides a Christ-believer up into ‘spirit’ (RPGWOC), ‘soul’ ([WZJ) and ‘body’ (UY`OC).
132                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

faith. In other words, God and the human believers are being active together.
That claim yields the idea I introduced of an overlap between divine and human
agency.
   Similarly, in the Philippians passage there is no direct indication of the precise
way in which God is at work in the Philippians to make them wish and do what
they should. In this letter there is much more material on the RPGWOC than in the
early letter to the Thessalonians. But this material is not brought into direct con-
tact with the text on the overlap of agency. What matters most for our purposes is
the fact that this text explicitly states the principle of such an overlap in believers
after conversion.

e. Summary on Paul
We may summarize and tighten our ﬁndings about Paul in the following way.
   There is ﬁrst a group of motifs that revolve around divine agency. (i) God’s
agency is emphasized all through. God has done and will do a number of things
in the world, from its creation onwards, via the sending of Christ, to the day of
judgement. (ii) However, all these things are not just done for their own sake.
Rather, they are everywhere connected with the purpose of generating knowledge
in human beings. This holds for non-Christ-believing Gentiles, to whom God’s
works were made manifest (text 8), as well as non-Christ-believing Jews, to
whom prophets, too, were sent (text 9). But it also holds, of course and quite
generally, for Christ-believers, to whom Christ was sent and made manifest
(cf. Rom. 3.21–26). (iii) God has also been more concretely active vis-à-vis
individual Christ-believers – e.g. Paul’s addressees and Paul himself – in order to
generate knowledge in them. He has sent them a vision of Christ (e.g., to Paul,
texts 6 and 7) or apostles of the good news of Christ (e.g., Paul to his addressees,
text 9). To those who have come to faith he has also sent the spirit (cf. e.g., Gal.
3.1–5), which is probably what now guides their desires and acts (texts 10 and
11).31 (iv) God has also been concretely active vis-à-vis groups and individual
human beings in the way that he has chosen or rejected them beforehand. In
accordance with the overall emphasis on knowledge, this is often expressed by
saying that they have themselves been ‘known’ by him beforehand (texts 8 and
9). It is this general activity on God’s part – and not least the one referred to
under (iii) – that is captured in the recurrent motif of transferral of agency (texts
1–5).
   Does Paul speak of a form of divine agency that is not related to human
knowledge or lack thereof? At least not to any very large degree. And that,
surely, has its reason. What Paul’s God, no less than Paul himself, is concerned
about is that he be understood, and of course in the way he should (according to
Paul). In Paul, divine agency is fundamentally about generating knowledge.

   31. To my mind, passages like Gal. 3.15, 3.14, 3.26 and 4.5–7 show that Paul had a pretty clear
idea of a sequence running from faith through baptism to reception of spirit. Gal. 5.16 and 18 then
show that Christ-believers will ‘live by the spirit’ (RPGWOCVK RGTKRCVGKUSCK) in the sense of
‘letting themselves be led by the spirit’ (RPGWOCVK CIGUSCK). The other central passage on the spirit
in relation to agency is Rom. 8.1–13 and 8.14–15.
                  ENGBERG-PEDERSEN Self-sufﬁciency and Power                                  133

   Next there is a group of motifs revolving around the human reaction to God’s
agency. Here there are three integrated concepts: responsibility, action and
knowledge. They lie on a logical line that goes back to knowledge. (v) Human
beings are responsible for their ways – whether right or wrong – because they
have been given the means for understanding (texts 8 and 9). This holds in spite
of the fact that their knowledge or lack thereof is also said to have been generated
by God beforehand (cf. [iv] above). Already here we may begin to see the special
idea in Paul that I have identiﬁed as one of an overlap between divine and human
agency. God is responsible, but human beings are responsible too. (vi) Human
beings are responsible because they themselves also act. The actions performed
by human beings – whether right or wrong – are their own. They are acting when-
ever they act. However, here too there is the notion of an overlap. When human
beings act the way they should, it is also God who is acting ‘in’ them (text 11;
end of text 6). (vii) The reason why we should say that human beings themselves
act (though also ‘together with’ God)32 is that they have also in some sense them-
selves either acquired or missed the proper knowledge of God that this is all
about. This is the crucial point. God knows beforehand (RTQIKPYUMGKP) those
he has elected. When this knowledge on God’s part is ‘met’ by the chosen ones,
then they also have knowledge (IPY`UKL) of God. In order for the kind of action
that ﬂows from this knowledge to be people’s own and in order for them to be
therefore also themselves responsible for their ways, the knowledge must in
some sense be their own, too, in addition to having clearly been generated by
God. Let us therefore stay with this issue and ask in what sense this meeting-
point of shared knowledge that Paul is trying so strongly to articulate may (also)
be said to be people’s own.
   Is human knowledge divinely or humanly generated in Paul? The ﬁrst and
obvious answer is that it is divinely generated. Everything we have said above
points in this direction. God has known beforehand and done a host of things in
order that human beings may come to know. The same is true for lack of knowl-
edge. It is when we turn to the other half of the question that we begin to see that
the question itself is misleadingly put. It would clearly be wrong to say that this
kind of human knowledge has been humanly generated, even if we were pre-
pared to speak of an overlap in this area too. Knowledge in a human being, in
the sense of ‘oneself coming to see something’, is not the kind of thing that can
be generated by the person who undergoes the experience. The idea of ‘self-
generated coming to see’ is meaningless. (Think of Plato’s Meno.) One can
certainly make another person come to see; or better: one can help another person
come to see. But the coming to see itself cannot be generated either by another
person or by oneself. Still, and this is the point, while not self-generated, the
knowledge one has when one has come to see something is so intimately tied in
with oneself, it is so intimately one’s own, that this fact in itself sufﬁces to make
also the acts that ﬂow from it one’s own and hence also more broadly to render

  32. This is the phrase employed for my notion of overlap at the end of text 6 (1 Cor. 15.10). One
might of course speak of ‘synergy’ instead of ‘overlap’, which would be very close to Paul’s own
phraseology. I am wary of the connotations, however, and prefer to employ a neutral term.
134                    Divine and Human Agency in Paul

one responsible for one’s own ways. Thus the kind of knowledge we are talking
about may both be said to be divinely generated and also to be distinctly and
intimately one’s own, without this requiring that it has also been humanly gener-
ated. It is this special feature of knowledge underlying individual action and
responsibility that explains why one may in their case speak of an overlap between
divine and human agency.
   There is an intense passage in 2 Corinthians in which Paul ends up describing
his own experience of coming to the true insight in a way that brings out particu-
larly strongly the way this experience, which has been generated by God, is also
particularly and intimately Paul’s own: 2 Cor. 4.1–6. We cannot unfortunately go
into this passage here. Sufﬁce it to say that it culminates in a verse (4.6) in which
Paul brings out very clearly the character of an inner vision and illumination that
he understands as being characteristic of the kind of knowledge (IPY`UKL) he is
trying to identify. Everything in this description is about inner illumination, apart
from the single word IPY`UKL, which the rest is precisely intended to elucidate.
Just as we ﬁnd in 4.4, so here too there is a clear division between what God has
done (shining forth in the interior in order to bring to light) and the resulting
knowledge in the form of a vision, which is very much (also) the person’s own
experience. This text, then, shows us in what way the proper knowledge is both
generated by God (or prevented by the god of the present world, for 4.4) and is
also very much the person’s distinctly own experience, even though not gener-
ated by him or her. We should conclude from this second group of motifs that the
human reaction to God’s agency in terms of responsibility, action and also knowl-
edge is very much their own.
   Finally, there is a third theme in all the texts we have been studying. This
pertains in particular to the question of the rhetorical purpose of Paul’s talk of
divine agency in relation to knowledge. Again and again Paul brings in the idea
of divine agency in generating the knowledge for which he is arguing. The pur-
pose is clearly to insist that what Paul presents as the true knowledge is in fact
this, just because it has been generated by God himself. It is not some merely
‘human knowledge’, but ‘God-knowledge’. What Paul himself reveals or makes
manifest (cf. HCPGTYUKL in 2 Cor. 4.2) is the truth (J CNJSGKC, ibid.) because it
has been directly generated by God. The importance of this theme is vast. But
the strong and exclusive emphasis on God’s agency in generating the proper
knowledge must not be taken to obliterate the other result we have also reached:
that the knowledge generated in this way in human beings by God is also dis-
tinctly their own, or in other words, that when they do have this knowledge, then
they are aligning themselves (and of course also being aligned) with God.


                     3. Comparison of Paul with Epictetus
We saw earlier that there are considerable similarities between Paul and Epic-
tetus with regard to the relationship of human beings to their own bodies and to
the rest of the world. This is also relevant to the question of the relationship with
God in either thinker, but here we also ﬁnd some rather interesting dissimilarities
                 ENGBERG-PEDERSEN Self-sufﬁciency and Power                     135

that are due to differences in the conception of God himself. What is the role of
God vis-à-vis human knowledge? How should we organize the similarities and
dissimilarities between Paul and Epictetus with regard to this question?
    (1) First, we should repeat a point already made regarding the phenomeno-
logical quality of the knowledge of God that both writers are concerned about.
In this respect the similarity is quite close. In both writers, the formula for this
knowledge is alignment with God. The basic description of this alignment is also
rather similar. In both writers, it is a matter of an inner understanding of the self
and its belonging which both reﬂects and is directed outwards to a God who is
himself understood as being (also) external to the psyche. It is this fundamental
similarity in the proper relationship with God – directedness towards God – that
explains the broader similarity we noted to begin with regarding the relationship
with one’s own body and with the rest of the world, that of disengagement and
turning one’s back on it. I have already emphasized that this comprehensive
similarity is a major one. It is what accounts for the sense that thoughtful people
have had since antiquity itself to the effect that Stoicism and (Pauline) Christian-
ity are sufﬁciently similar for it to be worth noting.
    We may focus the similarity by pointing out that the understanding of self-
sufﬁciency in connection with this knowledge that we elaborated in our ana-
lysis of Epictetus may be brought over wholesale into Paul. In Epictetus, as we
saw, a person who has the proper knowledge is certainly self-sufﬁcient in rela-
tion to his body and the rest of the world, but distinctly not in relation to God.
Exactly the same picture is given by Paul in Philippians (4.10–20) when he
spells out the manner in which he himself – as he claims – is ‘self-sufﬁcient’
(even down to the very word: CWVCTMJL, 4.11): entirely unconcerned about his
bodily and worldly situation (4.12), but instead being (literally) ‘empowered’
by God (4.13, the word is GPFWPCOGKP) in such a manner that, as a consequence,
he aligns himself with him.
    (2) Turning now to questions of epistemology rather than mere phenomen-
ology, we may note a dissimilarity with regard to the way the proper knowledge
is acquired. This dissimilarity is a very important one. It reﬂects a different con-
ception of God. It is also the fundamental difference, I suggest, that underlies all
claims to the effect that Stoicism and (Pauline) Christianity after all express quite
different worldviews. We must be particularly careful, however, in the way we
specify the difference.
    Let us begin from one of the two texts in which Epictetus explicitly refers to
the Christians.33 He is discussing freedom from fear (4.7) and asking why a child
or an adult who wishes to die will not feel fear when they come into the presence
of a tyrant surrounded by his guards (4.7.2–3). Next he asks the same question
for a person to whom it is completely the same whether to live or to die (4.7.4).
What, then, (4.7.5) if ‘due to some madness (OCPKC) or complete lack of sense
(CRQPQKC)’ somebody should have the same completely indifferent attitude
towards his property, children, wife and so forth as the other one had towards his
body? Would he too not be completely free of fear? (Yes)

  33. The other passage is Diss. 2.9.19–21.
136                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

      12 (Diss. 4.7.6–7) (6) Therefore, if madness (OCPKC) can produce this attitude of mind
      towards the things just mentioned, and also habit (GSQL), as with the Galilaeans (QK
      )CNKNCKQK), cannot reason (NQIQL) and demonstration (CRQFGKEKL) teach a man that
      God has made all things in the world and the whole world itself so that the latter be
      free from hindrance and complete in itself (CWVQVGNJL, perfect, self-sufﬁcing), whereas
      the parts of it (should) serve the needs of the whole? (7) Now all other animals…, but
      the rational animal…

   Epictetus’ reference to the ‘habit’ of the Galilaeans is mysterious. Perhaps he
means that the Christians are brought up more or less blindly, that is without
‘reason and demonstration’, to have their strange beliefs. But he is also implying
that it is one and the same attitude to worldly affairs that one may acquire either
from madness or from Christian ‘habit’ – or indeed in Epictetus’ own proper
way: from reason and demonstration.
   Let us then bring in a famous passage in Paul in which he describes the
character and content of his message to the Corinthians when he came to them
the ﬁrst time.
      13 (1 Cor. 2.4–5). (4) And my speech (NQIQL) and my proclamation (MJTWIOC) did not
      consist in persuasive words of wisdom (UQHKC), but in demonstration of spirit and
      power (CRQFGKEKL RPGWOCVQL MCK> FWPCOGYL), (5) in order that your faith (RKUVKL) be
      not in the wisdom of human beings (UQHKC CPSTYRYP), but in the power (FWPCOKL) of
      God.

    The interplay between these two texts is so close that they may serve together
to bring out the clear contrast between the two points of view. Where Epictetus
relies on the idea of a ‘rational demonstration’ (NQIQL and CRQFGKEKL) which
may ‘teach’ people the proper kind of knowledge and as such reﬂects Epictetus’
notion of God, Paul rejects this as ‘wisdom of human beings’ that is stated in
‘persuasive words of wisdom’. Instead, Paul’s NQIQL, which is a proclamation,
is a ‘demonstration of spirit and power’ which will generate something other than
Epictetus’ ‘learning’ (the word is OCSGKP), namely, faith (RKUVKL). The contrast
seems stark and uncompromising. Indeed, the two patterns of thought appear to
stand here in what appears to be a direct confrontation. But we must be very care-
ful in specifying the exact content.
    Paul himself provides valuable help in the immediately preceding ch. 1 of the
letter (1.18–25), where he has stated that the NQIQL of his proclamation (1.18,
23) is a case of ‘foolishness’ (OYTKC) – where Greeks expect wisdom (UQHKC) –
and weakness (CUSGPGKC) – where Jews expect divine power (FWPCOKL). The
weakness lies in the message of a cruciﬁed Christ (1.23, cf. 2.2). In text 13,
however, that follows almost immediately upon this, Paul’s proclamation is then
said to be a demonstration of spirit and divine power (again FWPCOKL). The solu-
tion to this apparent paradox lies in keeping the two halves of Paul’s message
together: the cruciﬁed Christ (weakness) and his resurrection (power). In this
way Paul may be said to be operating – so far, at least (but see more below) –
distinctly within the Jewish framework he has himself introduced of weakness
and power; only, while sticking to this framework, he is turning it around: what
Jews take to be weakness is in fact power. By contrast, when seen in relation to
                  ENGBERG-PEDERSEN Self-sufﬁciency and Power                                  137

the Greek framework of wisdom and foolishness both the message of weakness
and that of power are an example of the latter. They are foolishness.
   This – the contrast between God’s power and Greek wisdom (what Paul calls
merely ‘human wisdom’ in text 13) – is the contrast we need in order to make
sense of the two different pictures contained in texts 12 and 13 of God’s ways
of making human beings acquire the proper knowledge. Epictetus’ God is, as it
were, a predictable God. Indeed, he is eminently the guarantee of the predictabil-
ity of the world. This predictability, furthermore, constitutes the very content of
(Greek) UQHKC. Paul’s God, by contrast, is an unpredictable God.34 As he explains
in Romans, God’s ways are inscrutable (11.33–36). And as he has also explained
earlier in the same letter (4.17–25), this inscrutability is reﬂected in the fact that
Paul’s God is able to generate life out of death, as reﬂected in the story of Abra-
ham and, precisely, in the fate of Christ.
   It is obviously this difference of predictability and unpredictability in the con-
ception of God that has struck people – rightly – throughout the ages as consti-
tuting a major dissimilarity between, for instance, Paul and Greek philosophy. It
is also this difference that is nowadays often expressed by claiming – again
rightly – that Paul was thinking within an ‘apocalyptic’ framework. As we have
already seen, he does use the language of ‘revelation’ (CRQMCNW[UKL). More-
over, just as he speaks in the language of the apocalypticist of God’s ‘mystery’ at
the end of Romans 11 (11.25) where he is also describing God’s inscrutability,
so he again refers to a ‘mystery’ in our 1 Corinthians passage (at 2.7) immedi-
ately after having spoken of God’s power.
   Here, then, we have a strong and clear difference in the conception of God and
the concomitant understanding of the way human beings may acquire the proper
knowledge. On the one side we have ‘learning through reason and demonstra-
tion’ by considering the regular pattern of how God has from the start con-
structed the world and continues to manage it – and the relevance of that for
human beings.35 On the other side we have hearing and believing a message that
consists in a ‘demonstration of spirit and (God’s) power’, focusing on what God
has unpredictably (though in accordance with his general character) done in the
Christ event and the relevance of that for human beings. In spite of the shared
anchorage of the overall picture in what God has done, the difference is also very
clear. However, the immensely important point is that in Paul this whole picture
of God and the way human beings may acquire the proper knowledge is only one
half of the whole story. We must now look at the other half, which will once more
bring Paul back into close proximity with Epictetus.
   (3) If there is the difference we have just noted in point 2 in the way human
beings may acquire the proper knowledge, it remains the case that once they have
acquired it, they are in a state that is very similar epistemologically within the

   34. I have borrowed the notion of predictability/unpredictability from the title of Wayne Meeks’
article, ‘On Trusting an Unpredictable God: A Hermeneutical Reﬂection on Romans 9–11’, in J. T.
Carroll, C. H. Cosgrove and E. E. Johnson (eds.), Faith and History (Festschrift P. W. Meyer;
Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1990), pp. 105–24.
   35. Note that this is the way Paul himself says in Romans 1 that Gentiles both should and could
have reached the proper knowledge of God.
138                    Divine and Human Agency in Paul

two systems. Here we are not just talking, as in point 1 above, of the phe-
nomenological character of the state in terms of the relationship it implies with
the body, the world and God. Rather, it is its character of knowledge itself that is
in view. In Epictetus, of course, the state that human beings may acquire in the
way explained above is one of genuine knowledge (UQHKC). Similarly in Paul, the
acquired state is also one of genuine knowledge. It is not just a matter of faith or
belief (RKUVKL) in the sense of accepting a statement at face value without any
further understanding. On the contrary, it is a state that may well have begun as
faith, but has now turned into a case of understanding. It is faith with under-
standing. We have repeatedly seen that Paul describes this state as one of IPY`UKL.
As we recall, it is a state in which human beings meet with IPY`UKL the IPY`UKL
with which God has met them, from the beginning and now at the very moment
when they acquire it. Then it is strikingly revealing that in 1 Corinthians 1–2,
immediately after text 13 and after he has just denounced the Greek search for
UQHKC, Paul himself begins to speak of UQHKC, though ‘not the wisdom of the
present world nor of the rulers of the present world, who are on their way to
perish’ (2.6), but ‘God’s wisdom in a mystery, the hidden one which God deter-
mined beforehand from the beginning of time for our glory’ (2.7). Is this talk of
UQHKC just a nice linguistic paradox? Does Paul not really think of the new
knowledge as UQHKC? He does. For he goes on (2.10–16) to anchor it in a new
epistemological capacity: the spirit (RPGWOC). And here he ends with the start-
ling claim that ‘we’, that is, pneumatic believers, ‘possess Christ’s PQWL’, that is,
Christ’s (faculty of) understanding. 5QHKC and PQWL: through the RPGWOC, which
believers have received directly from God, they are now in a state that is one of
genuine knowledge; they fully know and understand what God has wanted them
to understand; they have God’s knowledge.
   This point needs emphasis. We saw that Paul described God as unpredictable.
That feature of Paul’s conception of God must remain in place. But now we must
also say that once human beings have acquired the proper knowledge – through
God’s unpredictable agency – they will have a knowledge which will either
dissolve this unpredictability or at least push it into a subsidiary position. These
people know God. They have understood God’s character as revealed in his
unpredictable acts. And Paul never entertains the possibility that they may still
be wrong about this.
   In this way the comparison of Paul with Epictetus ends up locating a number
of similarities and dissimilarities between them. There is similarity in the phe-
nomenology and content of the state of knowledge that is in focus in both sys-
tems with regard to the relationship of the knower with his or her own body, with
the rest of the world and with God. And there is similarity in the precise kind of
self-sufﬁciency that goes into these relationships (point 1 above). There is dis-
similarity in the conception of God that underlies the picture in either system of
how human beings may acquire the proper knowledge (point 2 above). But then
again there is similarity in the level of knowledge had by human beings once
they have been brought to acquire the proper knowledge. In both systems, these
people genuinely know (point 3 above).
                  ENGBERG-PEDERSEN Self-sufﬁciency and Power                               139

   The aim of this whole analysis has been twofold. I have partly wanted to tease
out similarities and dissimilarities in the handling of divine and human agency in
Epictetus and Paul in order to avoid generalizing statements, of which there are
far too many. I have also wanted to address both writers at the same level of dis-
course in order to see what comes out of treating them as players in the same
game, one that is not beforehand categorized as being either a religious or a phi-
losophical one. We have seen that the last attempt ﬁts the attitude adopted by the
two writers themselves. While they are both more or less explicitly rejecting the
other position, they also in fact make basic claims that are fundamentally similar
and – more importantly here – claims that they themselves know to be similar.
Epictetus knows that there is a similarity with what the ‘Galilaeans’ believe ‘from
habit’ and what he himself thinks can be proved. And Paul knows that his own
position is sufﬁciently similar to the Greek one to qualify as a form of ‘wisdom’,
though an alternative one. It is as part of this shared level of discourse, with its
many similarities, that the equally important dissimilarities should be understood.


                                        Conclusion
This essay remains a torso. I had planned to conclude by looking at the function
of the talk of divine agency in both writers and thus to place their thought not
only at the basic level of philosophy with which we have been engaged, but also
within their historical context, which is a material (including bodily), social and
not least political one. Here I would particularly have focused on the notion of
power, trying to show how the two writers use the talk about God to forge a new
‘habitus’ (in the sense developed by French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu) that has
some striking similarities in the manner it relates to the worldly powers, but also
some interesting differences. That will be for another occasion, however.
   Here I will conclude that there is no idea in either Paul or Epictetus of human
agency and self-sufﬁciency of a more modern kind, that is, in opposition to and
over against God and his agency. In other words, the distinction between divine
and human agency has no grip in either writer.36 Instead, there is an idea of a self
which is able to reject the world because in being directed towards and aligning
itself with God it has the self-sufﬁciency – and indeed, power – of God.




  36. Does this conclusion hold more generally for other writers in the context of Epictetus and
Paul? What, for instance, about Philo, whom John Barclay analyses most suggestively in this vol-
ume? Here again, however, I ﬁnd that the framework or perspective from which one begins the
analysis is of crucial importance. What would come out of looking at this fascinating material
against the background of those questions of epistemology and the phenomenology of knowledge
with which I have been concerned here?
                                          Chapter 8

                   ‘BY THE GRACE OF GOD I AM WHAT I AM’:
                    GRACE AND AGENCY IN PHILO AND PAUL

                                   John M. G. Barclay


The Jewish philosopher Philo and the Jewish apostle Paul were contemporaries
whose paths never crossed and whose minds moved within startlingly different
frameworks. Both, however, were profoundly engaged in the interpretation of the
Jewish Scriptures, both reﬂected deeply on God, and both placed human action
within the context of divine grace. A comparison which gives attention to the
differences as well as the similarities between these two ﬁgures seems well justi-
ﬁed, and has good precedent in recent scholarship.1 Of course, comparative
projects have well-known procedural pitfalls: in this case we have a huge volume
of Philo’s philosophical exegesis, in three modes (allegory; exposition; questions
and answers), to place alongside just seven highly contextualized letters from
Paul; and neither author is famed for his systematic consistency. On our topic
there are also strong undercurrents which can skew the balance of the compari-
son. Both Philo and Paul consider it the height of impiety to fail to acknowledge
the prior gracious action of God, and they have bequeathed to us the presumption
that a higher or truer expression of religion is one which places God more clearly
and more radically at the root of the process of causation.2 In its speciﬁc Chris-
tian expression – the priority of grace over works – this has spawned polemical
assaults on Judaism, as well as internal polemics against ‘Pelagian’ or ‘Arminian’
tendencies. The issues at stake are huge: the place of Paul, or Christianity in
general, in (or against) the history of religion. To allow this undertow to deter-
mine our comparison might cause us to exaggerate differences between Paul and
Philo; to compensate overmuch in the opposite direction might lead us to homoge-
nize two parallel but non-identical patterns of thought.


   1. See on our topic especially D. Zeller, Charis bei Philon und Paulus (Stuttgarter Bibelstudien
142; Stuttgart: Katholisches Bibelwerk, 1990). Earlier scholarship includes H. A. A. Kennedy,
Philo’s Contribution to Religion (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1919), and J. Moffatt, Grace in
the New Testament (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1931).
   2. Philip Alexander rightly highlights this presumption as operative even (indeed, especially)
in Sanders’ treatment of Judaism; see his essay, ‘Torah and Salvation in Tannatic Literature’, in
D. A. Carson, P. T. O’Brien and M. A. Seifrid (eds.), Justiﬁcation and Variegated Nomism, vol. 1:
The Complexities of Second Temple Judaism (Tübingen: Mohr, 2001), pp. 261–301.
                  BARCLAY ‘By the Grace of God I am what I am’                               141


                   1. Philo on Divine Grace and Human Virtue
Since Philo’s philosophy is throughout exegetical, we may best approach our
topic by watching how he handles the ﬁrst use of the term ZCTKL in the LXX, in
Gen. 6.8: 0Y`G GW=TG ZCTKP GPCPVKQP MWTKQW VQW SGQW (Deus 86–116).3 Typi-
cally, he weighs every word here, while focusing on the central theme of grace.
What does it mean to ﬁnd grace? As usual, Philo shows no knowledge of the
underlying Hebrew idiom. He engages on a philosophical distinction between
ﬁnding and rediscovering, which, by means of other pentateuchal texts, leads to a
reﬂection on the joy of unexpected discovery when, without human toil, God
simply ‘delivers’ (Gen. 27.20) eternal wisdom and perfect happiness (GWFCKOQPKC),
as the Israelites experienced in the land they entered, where they found cities and
houses (allegorized as generic and speciﬁc virtues) without having to build them
themselves (Deut. 6.10–11). But why is Noah singled out for mention here? It
cannot mean simply that he obtained grace, since all creation receives that from
the creator. Was he then found worthy of it? Perhaps, but perhaps not, since who
could be judged worthy of divine grace (Deus 104–106)? The best solution is
that he, as an CUVGKQL individual, eager to learn, discovered that all creation is
the gift or grace of God (107–109). But the text shows he was well-pleasing
(GWCTGUVJUCK) only to the two ‘powers’ of the Existent One (the ‘Lord’ power
and the ‘God’ power), whereas Moses ‘found grace’ with the Existent One him-
self (Exod. 33.17).
   This multi-faceted exegesis introduces us to all the main themes in Philo’s
treatment of grace. Noah’s discovery of the graced-character of the world is the
foundation of all else: creation as gift and God as gracious cause of all that is.
The discovery of happiness/virtue and the question of ‘worth’ is the key issue at
the interface between the grace of the Creator and his human creatures. And the
question of proximity to the Existent One alludes to the central dynamic in Philo’s
soteriology, the ascent of the soul to the vision of God. We will examine each of
these themes in turn from the perspective of grace, as space allows.

a. Grace in Creation and Causation
For Philo, the fundamental paradigm of the grace of God is the creation of the
world, which God out of pure goodness gifted to itself, not from need but because
his nature is beneﬁcent (Deus 108; Mut. 46). As Philo constantly reiterates, God
is HKNQFYTQL (Leg. 3.166; Conf. 182; Migr. 30; etc.) and his goodwill to the
world and to humanity is unfailing.4 While God’s powers (FWPCOGKL) can be dis-
tinguished as the ruling and the beneﬁcent/creating powers, God himself is not
responsible for evil but wills only the good (Spec. 4.187). Punishment and sanc-

   3. See the commentary on this treatise in D. Winston and J. Dillon (eds.), Two Treatises of
Philo of Alexandria. A Commentary on De Gigantibus and Quod Deus sit Immutabilis (Chico, CA:
Scholars, 1983).
   4. Zeller, Charis 38–41 rightly emphasizes that the foundation of Philo’s theology lies in this
‘ontological grace’.
142                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

tions are the work of Justice, at some remove from God; it is right that the ten
commandments were issued without mention of penalties since ‘it is ﬁtting that
the Great King…should be the guardian of peace and should richly and ungrudg-
ingly supply all the good things of peace to all people everywhere, and always’
(Decal. 178).5
    God’s gracious causation of all that exists is of critical importance for Philo in
distinguishing his philosophy from impious alternatives, and in motivating the
central core of piety, gratitude to God. Acknowledging God as the ultimate
CKVKQP of all that exists saves us from the irreligion of thinking the world is the
cause of itself (Deus 87), or that the world runs along by our own plans and
decisions and not by a providential Mind which governs everything (Leg. 3.29–
30). The critical task is to ‘refer all things to God’ (CRCPVC RTQUCRVGKP SGY^).
Adam conspicuously failed to do this: he claimed to have acquired an offspring
(Cain) through God (Gen. 4.1), using the preposition FKC which makes God
simply the instrument (QT    ICPQP) rather than the proper cause (CKV KQP, requiring
the preposition WR    Q, Cher. 125–30).6 Abraham, on the other hand, got it right
when he declared that he would take nothing from human beings (Gen. 14.22–
23), since he recognized that all he possessed came from God (RCTCA SGQW), even
if it came through human agents (Ebr. 105–10).7
    If this is the proper understanding of causation, its correlate is the offering of
gratitude to God, the returning of ZCTKL for ZCTKL (Her. 104). Abraham was
instructed by God to make an offering with the words NCDG OQK (Gen. 15.7), and
in these two words Philo ﬁnds a wealth of meaning (Her. 102–11). First, it indi-
cates we have no good thing of our own, since whatever we have we take from
Another;8 and, second, that what we take is not for ourselves but for God, that is,
to be returned, like a loan, in thanksgiving. If we acknowledge that what we have
(soul, sense and speech) are a holy trust from God, we will not squander them in
passions and illusions, but use sense to penetrate beyond sensible objects to the
truth behind them, use the soul to comprehend the higher truths, and use speech
to praise the world and its maker: then we will truly attain GWFCKOQPKC. Philo
emphasizes thanksgiving so often that it becomes one of the most characteristic
features of his religious philosophy.9 Countering the vanity and pride which
attribute the causation of good things to ourselves (Virt. 161–74; Praem. 24–27),
he insists on the necessity of returning the ‘ﬁrst-fruits’ of praise to the source of
all riches (Somn. 2.75–78). In a rare excursion outside the Pentateuch, he ﬁnds
the ideal in Hannah (whose name means ‘her grace’). Having received the divine

  5. Translations are my own, unless otherwise stated. The piling up of comprehensive
expressions here is reminiscent of Paul’s equally extravagant statement in 2 Cor. 9.8.
  6. As Zeller notes (Charis, 39), ﬁne distinctions of prepositions were important in Hellenistic
philosophy; see further bibliography in Zeller’s notes ad loc.
  7. As the Adam example shows, Philo’s scruples here extend even to the question of agency in
generating offspring; the ﬁnal explanation of circumcision in Spec. 1.10–12 is that it represents the
docking of human arrogance that we ourselves have generated our children.
  8. Paulinists will be reminded of 1 Cor. 4.8, which similarly uses the verbs GZ
                                                                                  Y and NCODCPY.
  9. On this theme, see J. LaPorte, Eucharistia in Philo (New York/Toronto: Edwin Mullen Press,
1983).
                   BARCLAY ‘By the Grace of God I am what I am’                                   143

seed to become pregnant, she dedicated Samuel to God, giving back to God
what had been given to her (1 Sam. 1.28): ‘having received him she returned him
in exchange to the giver, judging no good thing to be her own possession which
was not a divine gift of grace [ZCTKL SGKC]’ (Her. 5).

b. Virtue as Gift
The question which concerns us most is how this divine causation is related to
the exercise of human virtues. If God is the giver of all good things to all people,
how are some more virtuous than others? And if God gives unstintingly, does he
also give indiscriminately? Would that not be shameful as well as wasteful?
Would it not be more honourable to give to those capable of receiving what he
gives? These questions, which reﬂect the classic dilemmas for any benefactor in
antiquity,10 hover around Philo’s discussion of God as giver, and are usually
resolved with some sense of the ‘worthiness’ (CEKQVJL) of the recipients of
God’s gifts.11 As we saw at the outset, Philo was not entirely comfortable with
this notion (in the example of Noah), but it features repeatedly nonetheless. Even
in our passage on Gen. 6.8, if there were doubts about Noah, Moses can be said
to be worthy of grace (Deus 109) and elsewhere the covenants (dehistoricized as
examples of grace) are beneﬁts to those who are worthy of the gifts (Mut. 51–
53).12 God makes his dwelling in the soul which is ﬁtted to please him (Cher. 98–
101) – a ‘worthy house’ (CEKQZTGYL QK?MQL). There are apparent exceptions,
where God gives to the clearly unworthy, but that is only for the sake of the
worthy (Sacr. 124). What about the limiting case (also of interest to Paul), where
God makes promises of blessing to people before any good deed is recorded of
them, or even before they were born? In a long discussion of this matter, citing
Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Bezalel (Leg. 3.77–96), Philo
insists that their names suggest that their nature or character would bear fruit in
their virtues: even before their birth they had been stamped by God with a good
disposition and were thus predetermined to be worthy of his grace. Here and
elsewhere ‘worthiness’ does not have the strong sense of earning or deserving
God’s grace, but the weaker sense of being a ﬁtting or appropriate recipient of
that goodness (see, e.g., Spec. 1.43).13 Philo is concerned to show that God’s gifts

    10. On the inﬂuence of benefaction-terminology and conceptuality on Philo see J. Harrison,
Paul’s Language of Grace in its Graeco-Roman Context (WUNT 2.172; Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck,
2003), pp. 114–33.
    11. There are occasional hints of a distinction between the common grace in creation, given to
all, and the special or particular graces given to those who seek virtue (Ebr. 118–19; QG 2.75). But
normally, all the grace which Philo discusses is an aspect of God’s activity as creator, even if
differentially applied to individual recipients. Creation and salvation are not clearly distinguishable
categories.
    12. See the discussion of worthiness, and further examples, in Zeller, Charis, pp. 65–72.
    13. It is clear here that God bestows what is QKMGKC for the recipient – worthiness means what he
is capable of receiving. Despite citing this text, Harrison (like many predecessors) imports the notion
of ‘merit’ into Philo’s discussion of this matter. I ﬁnd no evidence for his statement that ‘the CEKQK
somehow attracted God’s ZCTKL’ (p. 125), which Harrison attributes to the inﬂuence of a Graeco-
Roman reciprocity ethic, in contrast to the Old Testament.
144                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

are neither arbitrary nor squandered; he does not envisage that humans have to
prove themselves lovers of virtue before God will bless them.
   Indeed, at many points Philo speciﬁcally denies that human virtue is what
merits divine grace, or is itself in any way self-generated. In a discussion of the
mysterious fault in Cain’s sacriﬁce (Gen. 4.3), Philo counters three human ten-
dencies: forgetting to give thanks to God, imagining we are ourselves the cause
of the good things which happen to us, and (a middle category) regarding our
virtues as our natural possession, considering ourselves therefore worthy of
graces from God (Sacr. 52–58). As an antidote to this last group he cites Deut.
9.5 (‘it is not because of your righteousness or the holiness of your heart that you
enter into the land …’): the covenant there mentioned is the gift of virtuous
action which he imparts to the human recipient (Sacr. 57). Just as the soul’s
capacity to conceive of God is ‘inbreathed’ by God in creation (Gen. 2.7; Det. 86
etc.), so the virtue represented by the patriarchs’ wives is ‘sown’ (fertilized) by
divine grace. It is God who gives to the soul its zeal for virtue (Leg. 1.34) and it
is God who gives it the strength to exercise that virtue. Explaining why in the
instructions for sacriﬁce the shoulder (symbol of strength) is described as ‘of
that removed’ (VQW CHCKTGOCVQL, Lev. 7.34 LXX), Philo writes (Leg. 3.137):
      It is necessary that the soul should not ascribe to itself its labour on behalf of virtue, but
      should remove this from itself (CHGNGKP) and refer it to God, confessing that it was not
      its own strength or its own power (FWPCOKL) which achieved the good (RGTKGRQKJUG VQ>
      MCNQP), but he who gifted the love for it (Q MCK> VQ>P GTYVC ZCTKUCOGPQL).

This does not deny the soul the action, but attributes the love for virtue, and the
strength to achieve it, to God.
    Thus it is only by God’s help that virtue is possible at all, though the precise
relation between divine and human agency can be variously described. In strin-
gent mode, Philo insists that we are only instruments through whom God acts: it
is impious to imagine that we are the CKVKQP of anything good (Ebr. 105–10).14
From this perspective he can emphasize the nothingness of humanity and press
for a polar opposition between God, whose nature it is to act (RQKGKP) and
humanity, whose nature it is to be acted upon (RCUZGKP; Cher. 77; Leg. 1.49).
In less stringent mode, he can describe the striving of the soul towards virtue
as being aided, furthered and enabled by the goodness of God. The moral activ-
ity of the soul is thus like a shrivelled ear of corn on which God sends his
‘saving powers’ to give power to rise up and bear full fruit (CPGIGTSJPCK VG
MCK> VGNGKQIQPJUCK, Virt. 49), or like a spark, warmed into life, which ﬂares up
and gives bright light: ‘even so, meagre goodness, by the thoughtfulness of God
(GRKHTQUWPJ^ SGQW), becomes large and abundant’ (Migr. 123). And to this Philo
can bear personal testimony. Discussing the changeability of the human heart,
he talks of the frequent occasions when, on the verge of admitting some vile
thought, he has ‘washed it away’ with better thoughts, ‘God in his grace having
poured on the soul a sweet draught in place of the bitter one’ (Leg. 2.32).


  14. In Leg. 1.82, even praise to God is regarded as, ﬁrst and foremost, an act of God.
                 BARCLAY ‘By the Grace of God I am what I am’                                     145

    The dialectic between human inclination towards virtue and the divine initia-
tive of grace can thus take varied expression. In his discussion of repentance in
Virt. 175ff., Philo ﬁrst stresses the importance of rejecting error and vice, in
turning towards God. Gentiles must ‘desert’ to the ranks of virtue, and the admo-
nitions to repentance teach us to ‘reﬁt’ our lives into a better condition. Deuter-
onomy 30.11–14 springs to mind: this is not too hard, but can be effected by the
harmony of our thoughts, words and actions (Virt. 183) and ‘if a man does not
forget to keep this harmony he will be well-pleasing to God, becoming at once
God-loving and loved by God’ (GWCTGUVJUGK SGY^ IGPQOGPQL QOQW SGQHKNJ>L
MCK> HKNQSGQL, Virt. 184). The ﬁtting comment on this is Deut. 26.17–18: ‘you
have today chosen God to be God for you, and God has chosen you today to be a
people for him’. Individualizing this, as usual (the ‘you’ is singular, after all),
Philo ﬁnds here a ‘glorious reciprocity of choice’ (RCIMCNJ VJL CKTGUGYL
CPVKFQUKL): humanity hastens to worship the Existent One, and God without
delay takes the suppliant to himself and anticipates (RTQCRCPVCP) the will of
those who honestly come to worship him (Virt. 185).
    That ‘anticipates’ is echoed in another passage on repentance (Leg. 3.211–15,
on the ‘groaning’ of Gen. 3.16). The good kind of groaning is performed by the
soul when the pleasure-loving disposition has ‘died out of the soul’ (CRQSCPJ^ GM
VJL [WZJL), which then can groan in repentance, crying out to the master. Many
souls have desired to repent but not been permitted by God to do so (Lot’s wife
is the classic example). In other cases, however, ‘their cry has ascended to God’
(Exod. 2.23), but only because of the grace of God: the cry could only ascend
because God has called it to himself. God thus anticipates (RTQCRCPVC^) some
souls, ‘coming to’ us to bless us (Exod. 20.24), so great is the grace of the Cause
(CKVKQP, Virt. 215).
    One further passage sets this dialectic in another perspective. This is preserved
only in fragment, coming from the lost Legum Allegoriae Book 4; it is a com-
mentary on Deut. 30.15, 19, where Moses sets before the people the challenge, ‘I
set before you life and death, blessing and curse…therefore choose life that your
descendants may live’. Philo is fascinated by this passage, but also concerned by
the implication that human choice could determine salvation. I cite the passage
here in full:
     It is a happy thing for the soul to have the power to choose the better of the two
     choices put forward by the Creator, but it is happier not for the soul to choose, but for
     the Creator to bring it over to himself and improve it (OCMCTKYVGTQP FG> VQ> OJ> CWVJ>P
     GNGUSCK VQ>P FG> FJOKQWTIQ>P RTQUCIGUSCK MCK> DGNVKY`UCK). For, strictly speaking
     (MWTKYL), the human mind does not choose the good through itself, but in accordance
     with the thoughtfulness of God (MCV’ GRKHTQUWPJP SGQW), since he bestows the best
     things upon the worthy. For two main principles are with the Lawgiver, namely, that,
     on the one hand, God does not govern all things as a man, and that, on the other, he
     trains and educates us as a man. Accordingly, when he maintains the second principle,
     namely, that God acts as a man, he introduces that which is in our power as the com-
     petence to know something, will, choose and avoid (VQ> GH’ JOKP GKUCIJ^ YL KMCPQ>L
     MCK> IPY`PCK VK MCK> DQWNGUSCK MCK> GNGUSCK MCK> HWIGKP). But when he afﬁrms that ﬁrst
     and better principle, namely, that God acts not as a man, he ascribes the powers and
     causes of all things to God (VCAL RCPVYP FWPCOGKL MCK> CKVKCL CPC[J^ SGY^) , leaving
146                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

      no work for a created being but showing it to be inactive (CR      TCMVQP) and passive
      (RCUZQP). He explains this when he says in other words that ‘God has known those who
      are his and those who are holy and he has brought them near to himself’ (Num. 16.5).
      But if selections and rejections (GMNQICK VG MCK> CRGMNQICK) are, strictly speaking,
      made by the one cause, why do you advise me, Lawgiver, to choose life or death, as
      though I were in control of my choice (YL VJL CKTGUGYL CWVQMTCVQTK)? But he
      would answer: Of such things hear a rather elementary explanation, namely, such things
      are said to those who have not yet been initiated in the great mysteries about the sov-
      ereignty and authority of the Uncreated (RGTK VG CTZJL MCK> GEQWUKCL VQW CIGPJVQW)
      and the exceeding nothingness of the created (MCK> RGTK> CICP QWFGPGKCL VQW IGPJVQW).15

Philo is wrestling with the question of free will, which a strong doctrine of divine
causation would make problematic; but he has to explain the presence of numer-
ous injunctions in the Scriptures, including those which suggest that human choice
is of decisive signiﬁcance. Wolfson argued, against the grain of this passage, that
Philo believed in absolute human free will (granted by God), but his thesis is
impossible, and at most one could argue here for a relative free will.16 But
rather than make room for human free choice and action within the divine
causation, Philo presents one as the shallower truth (when God acts ‘as a man’
to educate us, he speaks as if we have freedom of choice) and the other as the
deeper truth, accessible to those ‘initiated in the great mysteries’ of the sover-
eignty of God. According to this ‘better’ principle, God alone is the actor, and
the created being only ‘inactive’ and ‘passive’. It appears that Philo’s principles
of divine causation and divine grace can occasionally go so deep as to treat all
ethical injunctions and corresponding claims of human virtue as no more than a
useful rhetorical pretence.

c. The Ascent of the Soul
The ‘greater mysteries’ just noted gesture to the drama of salvation in Philo,
which consists of the soul’s upward journey from the life of the senses and the
passions to the right conception about God, and on through, eventually, to the
‘mysteries’ in contemplation of the Existent One himself.17 We cannot trace here
all the dimensions of this mysticism, but it is important to note two matters: ﬁrst,
that at every stage, and in every dimension of this soul-journey, the soul is
dependent on the grace of God in revealing himself; and second, that the highest
or climactic reaches of this ascent always end in the ‘rest’ or inactivity of the
soul, where the soul comes to its limits and experiences the pure agency of God.

   15. J. Rendell Harris, Fragments from Philo Judaeus (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1886), p. 8; the passage is found in the Res Sacrae Leontii et Joannis (Cod. Vat. 1553).
   16. H. A. Wolfson, Philo. Foundations of Religious Philosophy in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam
(2 vols.; Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1948), vol. 1, pp. 432–56; rightly challenged by
D. Winston, ‘Freedom and Determinism in Philo of Alexandria’, SP 3 (1974–75), pp. 47–70.
   17. The importance of Philo’s mysticism was rightly grasped by E. R. Goodenough in his By
Light, Light. The Mystic Gospel of Hellenistic Judaism (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1935),
even if he misconstrued it in part. Reaction against Goodenough has often dismissed his central thesis
too easily. See now the valuably balanced treatment by C. Noack, Gottesbewusstsein: Exegetische
Studien zur Soteriologie und Mystik bei Philo von Alexandria (WUNT 2.116; Tübingen: Mohr
Siebeck, 2000).
                  BARCLAY ‘By the Grace of God I am what I am’                                147

    As is well-known, Philo identiﬁes the three patriarchs with the three soul-
types discussed in Hellenistic philosophy: Abraham, who advances by learning;
Isaac, who is ‘self-taught’; and Jacob, who progresses by practice/discipline
(CU MJUKL). Each of these is dependent in critical ways on the grace of God.18
Abraham progresses beyond cosmos-contemplation to the knowledge of God,
but only as God reveals himself (Abr. 79–80). Isaac, the self-taught, is better
described as God-taught, and represents the laughter which God sows in human
hearts (e.g., Leg. 3.219). And although Jacob quintessentially works and wrestles
to be the RTQMQRVYP on the upward journey, the critical moment is when God,
in his mercy, allows him to pass over into the state of Israel (the one who sees
God), or into the state of Isaac, that is, rest (Sacr. 42; Migr. 26–33). In this
regard, Philo again offers a rare autobiographical remark, describing times when
he thought he knew what he wanted to write, but proved incapable of giving birth
to ideas, while at other times, coming to his work empty, ‘I suddenly became
full, the ideas falling in a shower from above and being sown invisibly’, an
experience of ‘divine possession’, ‘corybantic frenzy’ and sudden access to
language, ideas and light (Migr. 34–35).19 This is the same experience which he
elsewhere describes as ‘ﬁnding without seeking’, the moments of discovery noted
in our opening passage about Noah, when unexpectedly, and without human toil
or labour, knowledge is granted to the soul from God himself (cf. Fug. 166–76).
Such supreme knowledge of God is only possible when God ‘draws’ the soul up
to himself (Leg. 1.34–38), or when, in biblical terms, God ‘shows himself’ to the
soul, as he did to Moses (Exod. 33.13; Leg. 3.97–103; Post. 16; Abr. 80). Here
we can see only when our light is met by light from God (Deus 77–79). At the
top of the ladder of ascent are the genuine worshippers and friends of God who
apprehend God through God himself, light from light (Praem. 36–46). At this
point, human labour, toil and effort are useless and must wholly cease: it is pre-
cisely without work that the goods of the land are inherited (Deut. 6.10–11), for
the nature of the self-taught and the nature of rest is divine, ‘arising not by
human designs, but by a divine ecstasy’ (QWM CPSTYRKPCKL GRKPQKCKL, CNN’
GPSGY^ OCPKC^, Fug. 168).
    Philo’s theology of grace thus extends across the whole human journey, from
creation to perfection. God’s creatorial activity is central throughout, as grace is
the expression of God’s causation of everything good that comes to be. It would
be hard to ﬁnd stronger expressions of the priority of divine grace: any hint that
human activity was a prior cause of virtue or spiritual vision would suggest to
Philo the grossest impiety. As we have seen, he will often use language of
‘worthiness’, but only in the weak sense of the characters being ‘ﬁt’ to receive
divine grace; and those characters are so formed by God’s imprint on the soul,

    18. See the useful summary by Zeller, Charis, pp. 87–98.
    19. The sense of inadequacy experienced by Philo is not often given existential expression, but
it stands as the correlate of divine grace. As he puts it elsewhere, when Abraham most knew (GIPY)
himself was when he despaired (CRGIPY) of himself, and this as a step towards knowing ‘the utter
nothingness of created being. And the person who has despaired of himself is beginning to know
the Existent One’ (Somn. 1.60).
148                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

not, in the ﬁrst place, by their own achievement. Philo can speak often of the
moral and spiritual struggle of the soul, as it toils, yearns and progresses in
virtue, but when he needs to press the point he can insist that, strictly speaking,
God is the ultimate cause of virtue and, in the end, at the top of the ladder of
ascent, the soul becomes passive and divine gift is found to be all in all. Even
when one speaks of a human choice of moral options, there is a corresponding
CPVKFQUKL of divine choice, and that, he insists, is the ‘ﬁrst and better’ principle
of explanation for those who understand the mysteries of God. The scriptural
narratives are, in allegory, made timeless and individualized: at the deepest level
they concern the soul and its interaction with God.20 And at its moments of
deepest and truest reﬂection, the soul recognizes that what underpins, enables,
aids and perfects its own moral struggle is the prevenient grace of God; by the
grace of God it is what it is.


          2. Paul on the Grace of God-in-Christ and Human Agency
We may take as our entry point into Paul’s theology of grace a rapid trawl through
the opening chapters of his earliest letter, Galatians.21 Here, proclaiming ‘grace and
peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ’ (1.3), Paul rebukes the
Galatians for deserting ‘the one who called you in the grace of Christ’ (1.6),22
emphasizing both the divine initiative in the gospel as it encountered the Gentiles
and the possibility that that calling could be denied and renounced. Later he will
trace this gospel-initiative back to the promises given to Abraham (3.8), promises
of an ‘inheritance’ which did not come through the law, but ‘God graced them
through a promise’ (FK GRCIIGNKCL MGZCTKUVCK Q SGQL, 3.18). However, this is
not a timeless principle of grace, but a phenomenon given speciﬁc concretion in
the death of Christ: reminding the Galatians of the Son of God ‘who loved me and
gave himself for me’, Paul insists: ‘I will not reject the grace of God: for if
righteousness comes through the law, then Christ died in vain’ (2.20–21). The
same christocentric speciﬁcity applies in the case of Paul himself. After advancing
superlatively along the path of the ancestral traditions, he encountered a revelation
of God’s Son, which he interprets as the fulﬁlment of being set apart from his
mother’s womb and called by God’s grace (1.15–16; cf. 2.9). The dramatic refash-
ioning of the self that this revelation brought about is later described as sharing in

   20. For the relationship between Philo’s allegory and the historical Israel (both Scriptural and
contemporary) see my Jews in the Mediterranean Diaspora from Alexander to Trajan (Edinburgh:
T&T Clark, 1996), pp. 158–80; and E. Birnbaum, The Place of Judaism in Philo’s Thought. Israel,
Jews, and Proselytes (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1996).
   21. Surprisingly little has been written on Paul’s understanding of grace since Sanders ques-
tioned its signiﬁcance as a point of difference from Judaism (Paul and Palestinian Judaism,
London: SCM Press, 1977). Harrison, Paul’s Language of Grace contextualises Paul’s discourse in
the Graeco-Roman system of benefaction and reciprocity. See now F. B. Watson, Paul and the
Hermeneutics of Faith (London: T&T Clark International, 2004).
   22. On the textual problem (some early texts omit :TKUVQW), see J. L. Martyn, Galatians (New
York: Doubleday, 1997), p. 109, and R. N. Longenecker, Galatians (Waco, TX: Word Books,
1990), pp. 12–13, who reach opposite conclusions.
                 BARCLAY ‘By the Grace of God I am what I am’                           149

the death of Christ: ‘I have been cruciﬁed with Christ; it is no longer I who live,
but Christ who lives in me’ (2.19). Thus these chapters provide us with the central
aspects of the theme of grace in Paul (grace in Christ, to Gentile and Jew, apart
from the law, through death and new creation), which we pursue ﬁrst in general
terms, before looking more closely at grace and human agency.

a. Subversive Grace
Although Paul can occasionally discuss grace in the context of creational bless-
ings (2 Cor. 9.6–10), his characteristic stance is to associate the grace of God
with the Christ-event. The foundational event to which he calls the Corinthians’
attention is ‘the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ’ (2 Cor. 8.9), and there is little
doubt what (or whom) he is referring to by God’s ‘inexpressible gift’ (2 Cor.
9.15). In discussing the ﬁgure of Adam, Paul identiﬁes the grace of God not in
the constitution or capacity of humanity in general, but in the overﬂowing of the
‘gift in grace’ of the one man Jesus Christ (Rom. 5.12–21). Although the Christ-
event is the expression of ‘the grace of God’ (Gal. 2.21), there is no gap between
‘Christ’ and ‘God’ in this regard: a historical moment becomes the deﬁnitive
instance of divine grace which fundamentally alters the relationship between
humanity and God. Christ is not, then, a new and substitutable ‘label’ for divine
grace, but stands at a very particular moment when divine grace changes the
history of the world, throwing all else, before and after, into a different light.
   As we have seen, a focal point of Paul’s theology is the calling of Gentiles, for
which he is himself graced and equipped as an apostle (Gal. 1.6; 2.9; Rom.
15.15–16). But this is not just, as one might expect, an extension of grace, to
widen the circle of those already gifted by inclusion of some who were hitherto
ungraced. The radical edge of Paul’s gospel is that all are found to be under the
power of sin, and all in the category of ‘enemy’ or ‘unrighteous’ to whom his
grace is displayed (Rom. 3.8–20; 5.6–10). Like Philo, Paul is specially interested
in the cases of the patriarchs to whom promises were made before they were
born, or before they are recorded to have done any righteous deeds (Rom. 9.6–
29). For Paul, this underlines the sovereignty of divine grace: ‘I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy’ (Rom. 9.15, citing Exod. 33.19). He twice thereby
emphasizes that the origin of salvation belongs to God, not the human actor
(Rom. 9.12, 16; cf. 11.1–6).23 But he uses this catena of examples not only to
justify the inclusion of Gentiles, but ﬁrst and foremost to destabilize the category
of ‘Israel’ (Rom. 9.6), since the grace of God he observes at work does not
support but subvert the expected channels of inheritance. In the same way,
Abraham in Romans 4 becomes the representative recipient of grace not only for
Gentiles (whose father he is by the fact that he received the promise before he
was circumcised) but also for Jews: for both it is crucially signiﬁcant that he
‘believed God and it was reckoned to him for righteousness’ (Gen. 15.6), not as
one working to whom a reward might be attributed MCVCA QHGKNJOC, but as one
who did not work, to whom his faith was reckoned for righteousness MCVCA ZCTKP

   23. On Romans 9–11, see S. Westerholm, ‘Paul and the Law in Romans 9–11’, in J. D. G. Dunn
(ed.), Paul and the Mosaic Law (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1996), pp. 215–37.
150                      Divine and Human Agency in Paul

(Rom. 4.4–5). Paul is aware that this emphasis risks portraying God as arbitrary
and unjust in his distribution of grace (Rom. 9.19–24), and that it threatens to
dissolve the moral imperative which he continues to issue (Rom. 3.8; 6.15). Of
course he counters this by afﬁrming the power of grace to shape new patterns of
obedience, but it is still a risk he seems prepared to run in order to stress that God
in principle justiﬁes the ungodly (Rom. 4.5).
    Thus, an essential feature of grace in Paul’s theology is its inherent subver-
siveness, its tendency to call into question the normal methods of reward or the
expected channels of delivery. This is mirrored in (and no doubt partly based upon)
his own life-story. There was none more successfully advancing (RTQMQRVYP)
in Judaism, fulﬁlling the traditions of the ancestors and excelling in zeal for the
law and righteousness, as deﬁned by that law (Gal. 1.13–14; Phil. 3.6). But his
encounter with the grace of God was emphatically not another stage in that
advance, a further reﬁnement to the righteousness he found in the law, but a total
re-evaluation of all his norms, an act of God which undercut what he had previ-
ously held to be the deﬁnition of piety. This is nothing less than an experience of
death, a co-cruciﬁxion with Christ (2.18–19), since it involves the dismantling of
the old self and the creation of a new. This certainly involves the realization of
previous inadequacy, and the adoption of a new self-understanding, but it also
entails discovering oneself to be positioned within a new agency, the life of the
Spirit, or of Christ (2.20; 3.1–5). Romans 6–8 brings out and generalizes the full
subversiveness of this experience. Cruciﬁed in baptism, believers live only inas-
much as they share the risen life of Christ; ‘under grace’ (6.14), they can now
identify the crucial weakness of the law which was fatally exploited by sin. The
depth of despair about the self here is matched by the shocking exposure of the
inadequacy of the law; the power of the ﬂesh can only be countered by the power
of something newly present on the scene, the Spirit of Christ.
    Thus, divine grace in Paul is an eschatological event, which characteristically
subverts before it recreates. The challenge is not only to the pride of the pro-
gressors, but also to the path on which they thought they were progressing, the
conditions and frameworks in which piety (or righteousness, or wisdom) were
previously deﬁned. This dynamic of uncreation (in the cross, cf. 1 Corinthians 1–
2) precedes the establishment of a new creation on terms which are, in many
respects, self-consciously counter-cultural. God’s grace is not only prior in time
(though it is that), but also unexpected and destabilizing, and it continues as a
threat to the church just when believers think they are secure (1 Cor. 10.1–13;
Rom. 11.17–24). The single and decisive irruption of grace in the death and resur-
rection of Christ continues to press its dynamic into the life of believers, both in
their initial baptism and in their subsequent experiences of suffering and service.
If the narrative of the Christ-event is singular and particular, it is also re-enacted
in patterns of grace writ large (and small) across the life of the believer and the
church.24 To participate in Christ is to be continually reshaped by the event of
grace, with unpredictable results.


  24. See my essay, ‘Paul’s Story: Theology as Testimony’, in B. W. Longenecker (ed.), Narra-
                   BARCLAY ‘By the Grace of God I am what I am’                                    151

b. Divine Grace in Human Agency
How does this grace operate within the life of believers? Paul is not a philoso-
pher and we should not expect either a systematic or a consistent intellectual
model within which to conceptualize this relationship. On the other hand, one of
the characteristic features of Pauline paraenesis is the combination of indicative
and imperative, in which the indicative more or less directly refers to the saving
action of God, but the imperative follows, in strikingly similar terminology, as an
urgent corollary. There are also several examples of a peculiar dialectic, which
share in common a ﬂuctuating ascription of agency, even if their expression is
very varied. We may note brieﬂy here ﬁve speciﬁc examples of this phenome-
non, which I set out schematically to indicate the ﬂuctuation between divine (A)
and human (B) agency.25
   (i) 1 Corinthians 15.10: in a concise depiction of his call, Paul recognizes the
horror that his previous life was directed precisely against God’s purpose, in his
persecution of the church. However:
      A: ZCTKVK FG> SGQW GKOK Q GKOK MCK> J ZCTKL CWVQW J GKL GOG> QW MGPJ> GIGPJSJ,
      B: CNNCA RGTKUUQVGTQP CWVY`P RCPVYP GMQRKCUC,
      A: QWM GIY> FG> CNNCA J ZCTKL VQW SGQW [J] UW>P GOQK

Paul’s calling, both as apostle and believer, can only be attributed to the grace
of God (in this respect he is entirely ‘on a level’ with his Gentile converts); it is
what constitutes his new identity. Yet, he entertains here (and elsewhere; cf.
1 Cor. 9.27; 15.2, 14; 2 Cor. 6.1) the possibility that this grace could be ‘in vain’,
if it does not somehow take effect. The B-clause stresses that this grace did take
effect, and not in his passivity but in his (hyper-)activity. So far the structure
seems simple enough: divine grace calls forth, or takes effect in, human labour.
But the ﬁnal clause then swings back to emphasize the agency of grace again,
and explicitly draws attention to this ﬂuctuation by, in some sense, denying the
agency of the ‘I’ in the labour, or at least strongly qualifying it by reference to
the grace of God which is ‘with me’.26 Paul seems to be anxious to indicate that
grace continues to be operative within his own labour, not just at the inception of
his new life. But his rhetorical, and incomplete, expression leaves it hard to
discern how to relate the two agencies. Philo would have been dismayed to ﬁnd
that even the prepositions are inconsistent (GKL GOG … UW>P GOQK).



tive Dynamics in Paul: A Critical Assessment (London: Westminster/John Knox Press, 2002), pp.
133–56.
   25. Cf. the essay in this volume by Troels Engberg-Pedersen, who analyses a number of cases of
such ‘transferrals of agency’. His stress lies on the cognitive dimensions of such a phenomenon
which are, to my mind, only one feature of the entanglement of agencies described by Paul.
   26. The textual variant is potentially signiﬁcant. If the second deﬁnite article (in square
brackets) is read (as in A, ;, and corrected versions of ʠ and D), it suggests an outright denial: the
labourer was not ‘I’, but ‘the-grace-of-God-which-is-with-me’. If it is not read (as in ʠ*, B, D*, F, G,
1739, vg, etc.), the meaning could be taken either in this stringent sense or as a correction of B: ‘it
was not (only) I who worked, but (also) the grace of God worked with me’.
152                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   (ii) Philippians 2.12–14: having described the foundation and paradigm of
salvation in 2.6–11 (A), Paul issues a call which he regards as its logical outcome
(YUVG). The Philippians are instructed:
      B: OGVCA HQDQW MCK> VTQOQW VJ>P GCWVY`P UYVJTKCP MCVGTIC\GUSG
      A: SGQ>L ICT GUVKP Q GPGTIY`P GP WOKP MCK> VQ> SGNGKP MCK> VQ> GPGTIGKP WRG>T VJL
      GWFQMKCL
      B: RCPVC RQKGKVG ZYTK>L IQIIWUOY`P.

As the context in the whole letter makes clear, ‘salvation’ is a phenomenon
which begins and ends with the initiative of God (1.6; 2.6–11; 3.20–21); indeed,
earlier statements in this letter placed special emphasis on divine agency for and
in believers (1.6, 19–20, 28–29). But paradoxically this induces in believers not
simply joy but also ‘fear and trembling’; they are not spectators of an automatic
procedure, but called to act (‘work out your own salvation’). But as soon as this
strong and frightening imperative is issued, the A-clause swings attention back to
the divine agent, who ‘effectively works in you’ (GPGTIGKP) in some correlation
with ‘your work’ (MCVGTIC\GUSCK). The ICT conjunction suggests there is a
logical link between the two (providing reason or motive for action), but leaves
its precise nature unclear: does God’s work merely provoke, or also empower, or
even constitute believers’ ‘working out’ of their own salvation (cf. 4.13; Col.
1.29)? Strikingly the divine work affects both the will and the action of believers:
if even the will to act is attributed to God (whether as sole or as collaborative
agent), the believers’ agency is entangled with divine agency from the roots up.
    (iii) Galatians 2.19–21: the same dialectical pattern seems to characterize
this famous and paradigmatic statement about the formation of the believers’
new identity:
      A: :TKUVY^ UWPGUVCWTYOCK \Y` FG> QWMGVK GIY \J^ FG> GP GOQK> :TKUVQL
      B: Q> FG> PWP \Y` GP UCTMK GP RKUVGK \Y` VJ^ VQW WKQW VQW SGQW VQW CICRJUCPVQL OG
      MCK> RCTCFQPVQL GCWVQ>P WRG>T GOQW

To which Paul adds: QWM CSGVY` VJ>P ZCTKP VQW SGQW…
   So fundamental is the recreation of the self that it can be described as a ‘co-
cruciﬁxion’ with Christ, and this participation means also the ﬁrst subject of the
new life is emphatically declared to be Christ, not ‘I’. But then, at least in a
certain sphere, or a certain sense, the ‘I’ can be said to live, yet (whether the
genitive be objective or subjective) it has its new identity focused on Christ,
whose work of self-giving and loving is paradoxically precisely ‘for me’! The self
here is not obliterated or hijacked by another agency; but neither is it simply
informed of a new possibility, or instructed into a new view of the world. It is
reconstituted in such a fashion that one has to speak thereafter of dual agency, and
not simply of one operating in partnership with the other, but of Christ operating
‘in’ the human agent. But this new power is clearly non-coercive: Paul entertains
as a real possibility (all too real in Galatia) that one can reject the grace of God.
   (iv) and (v) Romans 15.15–19 and 2 Corinthians 9.8–10: our two other exam-
ples can be summarized more brieﬂy.27 In Romans 15 Paul reafﬁrms the ‘grace

  27. I have discussed them more fully elsewhere in a forthcoming essay in honour of E. P. Sanders.
                  BARCLAY ‘By the Grace of God I am what I am’                                  153

of God given to me’ so that he served as a priest of Christ presenting the offer-
ing of the Gentiles. So, he has a boast in Christ Jesus since he will speak only
of what Christ has worked through him (QW ICAT VQNOJUY VK NCNGKP Y]P QW
MCVGKTICUCVQ :TKUVQ>L FK’ GOQW ). Although this passage appears less pro-
grammatic than the others, it seems to reﬂect something typical in Paul’s self-
appraisal: divine agency (interchangeably in this passage the grace of God, the
work of Christ and the power of the Spirit) is what enables him to boast of his
agency. The one does not cancel out or replace the other, but Paul’s agency is
only comprehensible within a framework of divine work.28 In 2 Corinthians 9
Paul’s complex theology of grace reveals the same dynamics: it is because God is
able to make all grace abound to the Corinthians that they have the sufﬁciency to
abound in ‘every good work’, speciﬁcally here the good work of the collection
(9.6–10). The fact that God is the source of the necessary grace does not reduce
the imperative to give, which is the rhetorical force of the whole passage. On
the other hand, the chief reason here offered for giving, and the proof that it is
authentically Christian giving, is the spring of grace on which Christian gener-
osity depends.
   These ﬁve texts (in different letters and on different topics) suggest that Paul
entertains a self-consciously complex view of agency in relation to Christian
work. In all cases, the logical sequence (whatever its grammatical expression)
places divine grace anterior to human action, and afﬁrms the continuation of that
grace in human activity. But in no case does the human actor become passive or
inactive in the face of divine grace, but is rather energized by that grace to action.
The relationship between the two actors can be expressed through a variety of
prepositions: grace may be described as ‘towards me’ (GKL GOG, 1 Cor. 15.10;
2 Cor. 9.8), ‘with me’ (UW>P GOQK, 1 Cor. 15.10), ‘through me’ (FK’ GOQW, Rom.
15.18) and ‘in me’ (GP GOQK, Gal. 2.20; Phil. 2.13). Paul appears to have no stable
articulation of this matter.
   This brief analysis of a few texts only scratches the surface of the matter and
a fuller enquiry would require a close analysis of the logical structure of Paul’s
theology and ethics (if we may still use those category labels). To return to
Galatians, and to its paraenesis in particular, the question may be focused by
asking a simple question: what is the force of the dative of the noun RPGWOC in
the three expressions RPGWOCVK RGTKRCVGKVG (5.16), GK RPGWOCVK \Y`OGP and
RPGWOCVK UVQKZY`OGP (5.25)? We may best approach this question by a com-
parison of two contrasting interpretations. Martyn’s analysis of this passage
(5.13–6.10) is brought under the heading, ‘The Galatians’ role in the Spirit’s war
of liberation’ (p. 524).29 It is crucial for his interpretation of Galatians that the
Spirit and Flesh (capitalized) are invasive powers who act upon the Galatian
Christians, and who enlist those Christians to active engagement in their side of
the apocalyptic war. The believers are not thereby rendered puppets (531–32),
but neither are they merely offered resources in their own struggle (535). In the


  28. On Paul’s apostolic agency, cf. 2 Cor. 3.4–6 where he reﬂects on its conditions of possibility.
  29. All references here are to his Galatians.
154                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

analysis of agency (the works of the Flesh and the fruit of the Spirit) humans are
not autonomous: ‘the Spirit is and remains the primary actor in the military
engagement … [The Galatians’] deeds are ﬁrst of all the acts of the Spirit (5.22;
cf. 4.6) and secondly the acts of themselves as persons into whose hearts the
Spirit has made its entrance (5.24)’ (535). Thus the Galatians are not simply
offered a choice of two paths. Although 5.16 is conditional in sense (if you walk
by the Spirit, you will not fulﬁl the desire of the Flesh), it is predicated on the
prior act of grace, which makes the Galatians addressable in these terms (534).
    Engberg-Pedersen’s interpretation is strikingly different, in crucial respects.
This is not because there is serious disagreement on any of the major exegetical
issues: they both read 5.16b as a strong negative assertion, both think 5.25a is
a real condition, and both emphasize the communal dimension of the ethics of
Galatians.30 Where they disagree is on the interpretative framework in which to
read Paul’s ethical instructions. At one level, this surfaces in the different read-
ings of RPGWOC and UCTE. Engberg-Pedersen resists capitalization (the Galatians
are ‘led by the spirit’). Although he acknowledges that, at least in 5.17, these two
terms are described as ‘mythical’ forces (163) in mutual conﬂict, his preference
is to analyze their role here with a ‘naturalistic meaning’ (337 n. 39).31 The ﬂesh
thus stands for ‘any feature…that belongs to the individual…and is singled out
as having a normative role to play’ (153), while ‘there is no new and different
content to having the pneuma than what already went into having pistis’ (158).
The lists, therefore, contra Martyn, are emphatically lists of human vices and
virtues, and the term ‘fruit’ should not be pressed to produce ‘a contrast between
God’s gift and human effort’ (339 n. 5). When Paul thus talks about being led by
the spirit/Spirit, what he means is not (or not only – see below) the placing of
human agency in relation to another external power, but the crucial moment (or
process) of understanding who one truly is, in self-identiﬁcation and commit-
ment to community. Paul’s ethical imperatives and exhortations are, in Engberg-
Pedersen’s view, utterly incomprehensible unless they presuppose that the Gala-
tians can decide whether or not to let themselves be ‘led by the spirit’ in this way
(342; see further below).
    It would take us too far aﬁeld to attempt to determine exactly the nature of
this interpretative difference.32 When Engberg-Pedersen says that the social–
ethical instructions in Galatians show us what the Christ-event is ‘all about’
(137) and ‘spell out’ the normative knowledge reﬂected in the Christ event
(138), this can be taken merely in the sense that the new practices are what the
theology is ‘geared towards’ (138, 140, 145–46): they are the target for the dis-
course. Both interpreters are strongly in agreement that ‘ethics’ is not a distinct

   30. They even agree on the ‘subjective genitive’ reading of RKUVKL :TKUVQW in 2.20, which
perhaps turns out to be less theologically pivotal than has been claimed.
   31. Unless otherwise stated, references are to T. Engberg-Pedersen, Paul and the Stoics (Edin-
burgh: T&T Clark, 2000).
   32. The further conversation in JSNT 86 (2002) is illuminating in many respects: J. L. Martyn,
‘De-apocalypticizing Paul: an Essay focused on Paul and the Stoics by Troels Engberg-Pedersen’,
pp. 61–102; T. Engberg-Pedersen, ‘Response to Martyn’, pp.103–14.
                   BARCLAY ‘By the Grace of God I am what I am’                                     155

or secondary feature of the letter. But there is some ambiguity (at least to this
reader) over whether the apparently strong statements about divine/Spirit agency
in Galatians are (i) merely being bracketed out by Engberg-Pedersen for the pur-
poses of his very speciﬁc analysis; or (ii) are being given a strong and self-
conscious interpretation/translation as statements that are really about human
agency or self-understanding. There are several statements in Paul and the Stoics
that would support reading (i): the X-I trajectory (for Christ/God to humanity) ‘in
a manner of speaking lies outside and before the I-X-S model proper’ (140); the
power-language of Galatians is thus not denied, but it is insisted that Galatians
is ‘not just’ talking about that, but ‘also’ about the self-understanding of the
Galatians’ (141–42, 150, 175–77).33 On the other hand, there are moments when
the references to divine agency seem to be translated into other kinds of state-
ment (reading [ii]), since the original sense (Paul’s) is inaccessible to us (see
notes at 331, 335–36, 340).34 Engberg-Pedersen suggests, for instance, that we
‘translate’ participation in Christ as ‘self-identiﬁcation’ (147). ‘Christ lives “in
me”. That is, Paul sees and identiﬁes himself normatively as nothing but a Christ-
person’ (147). But what is the meaning here of ‘that is’?
   I have indulged in this apparent digression, because these two very different
readings of Paul raise the most critical questions about how to understand the
relation between divine and human agency. If the ‘divine act’ is either bracketed
out of the equation, or left dangling in an ‘untranslated’ form, a ‘mythical’ expres-
sion juxtaposed with non-mythical expressions of human agency, this has the
effect of leaving the two agencies unrelated, quite contrary to the conscious and
complex ways we have seen them interwoven in Paul. At best it leaves the human
agent as a respondent to the divine, with response as a second and separable act
from divine agency. Alternatively, the two may be juxtaposed as non-contrasting,
a condition still requiring some conceptual apparatus to explain their mutual rela-
tionship.35 But Martyn’s stress on the prior agency of Spirit renders puzzling how

   33. In his JSNT ‘Response’ (pp. 106–107), Engberg-Pedersen insists he was not advocating an
either/or, and that the exclusive reading – emphasizing either divine power or human agency – is
both a misreading of his text and an anachronism foisted on Paul by modern interpreters. Cf. his
essay in this volume.
   34. See further the introductory remarks (Paul and the Stoics, 25–30), with reference to Bultmann,
and a crucial note (340 n. 9): ‘whether we like it or not, we are forced to step back a little from Paul’s
own perspective… Since the language of the [ancient] philosophers is more immediately accessible to
us, we are virtually forced by a number of facts (that this language is so close to Paul’s own, that Paul
more or less explicitly uses it in places, and that other features in Paul may easily be ﬁtted into what
is basically a philosophical frame) to employ that framework in our interpretation of what Paul is
talking about.’ Among the questions that arise are: how much is ‘a little’? Are there other features of
Paul – critical, foundational and non-negotiable – that are not easily ﬁtted into a philosophical frame?
Whose philosophical frame, and can it accommodate statements about divine agency? If the Stoic
model adopted here cannot give them much weight, is it commensurate with Paul? Would Philo’s
philosophical frame (heavily inﬂuenced by Stoicism, by biblical language and by a Jewish piety of
prayer and thanksgiving) be a closer point of comparison?
   35. Engberg-Pedersen insists, against Martyn’s criticism, that he in no way denies the present
agency of God (‘Response’, pp. 108–109; cf. Martyn, ‘De-apocalyticizing Paul’, p. 101). How the
two agencies are related is one of the topics addressed in his essay in this volume.
156                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

Paul can conceive of the possibility that the Galatians refuse to walk by the
Spirit and sow to the Flesh: where do they derive the impetus (the will) to deny
the Spirit, and, if from the Flesh, why does Paul exhort the Galatians on this
matter?36 Can we give sufﬁcient (I do not say ‘equal’) weight to both divine and
human agency to make sense of both Paul’s prayers and his exhortations? Is it
helpful to frame these in terms of chronological anteriority, or is the placement of
one agency ‘within’ the other a better metaphor?37 It appears that human agency
is the necessary expression of the life of the Spirit, and certainly not its antithe-
sis; the two are not mutually exclusive as if in some zero-sum calculation.38
And it is necessary not only because God’s grace engages the will and action of
the believer, but also because it is always possible to reject the grace of God. If,
in some measure, Paul can envisage progress towards a ‘stronger’ faith and a
better knowledge, he also regards himself and his converts as standing perma-
nently on the edge of judgment, dependent not on their progress but on the grace
in which they stand ‘in fear and trembling’.
    But here everything depends on how one conceives the ‘human agent’ recon-
stituted in Christ. Although in one sense we may speak properly of a ‘dual agency’,
in non-exclusive relation, this would be inadequately expressed as the co-operation
or conjunction of two agents, or as the relationship of gift and response, if it is
thereby forgotten that the ‘response’ continues to be activated by grace, and the
believers’ agency embedded within that of the Spirit. If we give any weight to
Paul’s prepositions, some account must be given to ‘in’ and ‘through’, as well as
‘towards’ and ‘with’. Paul’s central theology of participation requires that human
agency is reconceived without being abandoned, the self not merely relocated but
reconstituted by its absorption within the non-coercive power of grace.39


                                         3. Conclusion
This brief discussion of Philo and Paul has attempted to identify the main char-
acteristics of their thought, although much is required in further analysis. We
may draw the following three conclusions:
   1. Both Philo and Paul emphasize the priority of divine grace, as the originat-
ing cause of salvation, including human virtue. Their expressions of this matter
are different, not least because Philo makes an effort (sometimes) at philosophi-
cal precision, whereas Paul delights in paradox and rhetorical surprise. But it

   36. Each of our debaters accuses the other of emasculating Paul’s ethics. For Martyn, to advocate
human decision without divine power is to condemn paraenesis to impotence (‘De-apocalyticizing
Paul’, p. 92 n. 49; p. 102 n. 66); for Engberg-Pedersen, Paul’s appeals to his converts are meaningless
unless their understanding and acts are of real signiﬁcance (‘Response’, p. 107).
   37. My presupposition is that Paul’s and Philo’s language is inevitably metaphorical, but not
necessarily requiring to be ‘translated’ into terms accessible to (post-Enlightenment) philosophy.
The life of faith (including prayer and thanksgiving) has its own requirements, not least unapolo-
getic recognition of divine agency.
   38. See above, the Introduction to this volume.
   39. If we need a single term, though these are perhaps best avoided, ‘energism’ is preferable to
‘synergism’, not least because, as a neologism, it invites further enquiry.
                  BARCLAY ‘By the Grace of God I am what I am’                                  157

would be hard to adjudicate which was the more ‘radical’ in their viewpoint.
Philo can press divine origination to the point where, in accordance with the
‘deeper mysteries’, he can relativize talk of human effort or choice as merely
useful discourse for the less advanced. Paul can press divine election to the point
where God appears wilfully arbitrary, and in dialectical mode can insist on a
formulation such as ‘I, yet not I, but the grace of God’ (though never the other
way around).
    2. There is a substantial difference in the theological framework in which
they place this grace. Philo identiﬁes grace as the creative energy of God, and
thus associates it with nature, the cosmos and the fulﬁlment of created human
potential. For Paul, grace is revealed and enacted in the Christ-event, and thus
as an eschatological event of new creation. It is this sense of novelty which
gives his theology its greater subversive dynamic, its capacity to destabilize
narratives of nature, tradition and progress. When compared as structural sys-
tems, this does not make Paul’s theology of grace any more ‘radical’ than Philo’s,
but in its rhetorical and existential impact it bears the capacity to undercut the
stable structures on which ‘nature’, ‘law’ and ‘ethics’ are built. To put this another
way, Paul’s understanding of grace is both more ‘particularized’ than Philo’s (in
its association with Christ) and very speciﬁcally ‘narrativized’. Divine grace
took shape in the Christ-event, was experienced in a foundational event of ‘con-
version’, continues to be experienced in daily experience, and is embedded in
repeated acts of thanksgiving. Philo has some examples to tell of ‘daily experi-
ence’ of grace, and shares Paul’s concern with thanksgiving, but Paul’s theology
is focused on a very particular narrative in its foundational and oft-remembered
association with Christ.
    3. If Paul lacks Philo’s concern with the ‘worthiness’ of the recipients of grace,
this is not because Philo pollutes his theology of grace with notions of merit, in
contrast to a ‘purer’ Pauline conceptuality. As we have seen, ‘worthy’ in Philo
means ‘capable’, not ‘deserving’, and Philo’s concern is lest God’s gifts be arbi-
trary or wasted. Paul does not share this anxiety, or at least not to the same
degree: he takes delight in the paradox of a scandalously proﬂigate Giver, at the
risk of falling into a hard and arbitrary predestinarianism. On the other hand,
Philo stresses the causative dynamics of grace to the extent that, in deepest reality,
or at least at its ultimate stages of ascent, the soul is represented as inactive or
passive, to avoid any implication of synergism. Paul will not stretch his under-
standing of agency so far in that direction: the work of the Spirit does not substi-
tute for, but precisely energizes, the work of the believer. If the ideal man for
Philo is the resting sage, who approaches the vision of God in pure passivity,
Paul’s is the obedient Adam, Christ.40 Perhaps each would have thought the
other’s theology dangerously weak at these signiﬁcant points.




   40. In terms of the models outlined in the Introduction, Paul’s theology appears closer to 3, than
to 2 or 1; Philo’s has at least some elements of 1.
                                   Chapter 9

        SIN IN GOD’S ECONOMY: AGENCIES IN ROMANS 1 AND 7

                              Simon Gathercole


                    Introduction: Structure and Argument
This chapter aims to contribute to the overall theme of ‘divine and human agency
in Paul and his cultural environment’ by attempting to synthesize some aspects of
Paul’s presentation of sin, particularly in Romans. Romans 1 and 7 are obviously
two of the most heavily discussed passages in the New Testament, and so might
seem to be an odd choice for analysis. However, what one sees much less fre-
quently is the attempt actually to bring them into relation to one another. They
are usually taken to be talking about rather different things. This paper is an
attempt at a synthetic analysis, and also aims to integrate them with some of
Paul’s other statements along the way.
   Part 1 will sketch, in basic outline, the way in which Romans 1 and 7 both
depict a ‘history of sin’ – that is to say, they give an account of the world as
having been dominated by sinful activity on the part of humanity. In the course
of this, it can be seen that the two chapters share a considerable amount of
common ground.
   Part 2, secondly, will focus on the distinctive aspects of agency in the two
chapters. We will examine the way in which Paul shifts from an exposition
which is centred on the action of humanity and God in chapter 1, to the very
different picture in Romans 7 in which all the action seems to be carried out by
the mysterious ﬁgure of ‘Sin’, in the course of Paul’s denial that he considers the
Law to be an evil power.
   Thirdly, in Part 3 it will be explored how in both cases, Paul has a radically
theocentric and gospel-centred view of sin, even as this applies to the processes
of sin and sinful action. In particular, these processes both have a speciﬁcally
revelatory character, with revelation here deﬁned as ‘the public disclosure by
God of a previously hidden reality, the apprehension of which accompanies
salvation’. The main argument boils down to the following: that through the very
different accounts of the history of sin in Romans 1 and 7, there is nevertheless a
common concern to show how both function as means of divine revelation, and
therefore play a crucial role in God’s economy.
       GATHERCOLE Sin in God’s Economy: Agencies in Romans 1 and 7 159


                                 1. The Common Pattern
Both Romans 1.18–32 and 7.7–25 function in Romans as accounts of what has
become known in NT scholarship as ‘the plight’. The former is part of Paul’s
larger Verdammnisgeschichte in Romans 1.18–3.20 which is immediately fol-
lowed by the ‘solution’: the ‘but now the righteousness of God has been revealed’
in 3.21. Similarly, the account of life under the Law in Romans 7 is immediately
followed by the triumphant note of 8.1: ‘Now, then, there is no condemnation for
those in Christ Jesus’. The intention in Part 1 here is to identify some common
elements in the two accounts of the ‘history of sin’ in Romans 1.18–32 and 7.7–
25. At this stage, the aim is simply to describe the stages of the process, without
reference to the overarching purpose in that process.

1.1 Romans 1
Revelation: One of the goals of the argument in Romans 1.18–32 is to state that
those ‘who suppress the truth’ (1.18) are ‘without excuse’ (1.20). To this end,
Paul spells out the fact that the truth to be known about God has been made clear
by him, and thus certain aspects of his character have been visible in or to his
creatures since the creation of the world (CRQ> MVKUGYL MQUOQW VQKL RQKJOCUKP
PQQWOGPC MCSQTCVCK).1 Everything in Romans 1.18–32 is thus predicated upon
the divine action of revelation.

Knowledge: As a result, it can be presupposed that those in question – at least for
a specious moment – ‘recognized God’ (1.21). They have in some sense had
access to the ‘truth’ which they now suppress (1.18).

Suppression/Exchange: What is clear is that this knowledge has not been em-
braced. There appears, however, to be a certain tension in Paul’s account as to
whether the knowledge described above is still a present possession of humanity.
On the one hand, Paul implies that it is something which is being constantly
rejected (CPSTYRYP VY`P VJ>P CNJSGKCP GP CFKMKCL MCVGZQPVYP ). But it has
also been exchanged (JN  NCECP VJ>P FQECP VQW CHSCTVQW SGQW ), an image
which would imply that it has in some important sense been lost. It has been
exchanged speciﬁcally for worthless idols – a point to which we will return later
on. Whichever category is used, this suppression/exchange is a kind of meta-sin
in Romans 1. As such, the relation between divine and human agency here is

   1. Although it is of no particular signiﬁcance to the present argument, the phrase CRQ> MVKUGYL
MQUOQW is likely to have a temporal sense: it is very similar to CRQ> MCVCDQNJL MQUOQW, which in
the NT always denotes ‘since the foundation of the world’ (Mt. 13.35; 25.34; Lk. 11.50; Heb. 4.3;
9.26; Rev. 13.8; 17.8; cf. 2 Pet. 3.4; Mk 10.6; 13.19; Mt. 24.2). This reading of CRQ> MVKUGYL
MQUOQW remains tentative, however, since there are parallels on both sides. See, e.g. Josephus, War
6.269–70 (though mistranslated in the Loeb: see S. Catto, ‘Does proseuchas poieisthai in Josephus’
Antiquities of the Jews 14.257–58 mean ‘Build Places of Prayer’?’, JSJ 35 [2004], pp. 159–68
[p. 165 n. 29]); cf. Wis. 13.4. Again, the dative VQKL RQKJOCUKP can just as easily designate the
recipients (‘to’) of the revelation as its locus (‘in’).
160                       Divine and Human Agency in Paul

clearly one of confrontation: the human response to the divine action of revela-
tion is opposition.

Sinful Action: The meta-sin of suppression or exchange then issues in a cascade
of sins plural, in physical degradation in general (1.24), and in female and male
homosexuality (1.26–27). This is then expanded to the entire sphere of ‘doing
what is not ﬁtting’ (RQKGKP VCA OJ> MCSJMQPVC), and to the whole host of different
kinds of sin which emerges in the vice list depicting the social chaos of a world
in rebellion against God (1.28–31).

Death: The result of this behaviour is, according to the divine decree, death (QK
VCA VQKCWVC RTCUUQPVGL CE KQK SCPCVQW GKUKP: 1.32).

1.2. Romans 7
Revelation: The commandment, or the Law, is the essential element of revelation
in Romans 7. While the initial sound of Paul’s statements points towards the
Mosaic Torah, there is also reminiscence of Eden language. ‘Law’ very obvi-
ously does not mean, in 7.1–6 and 7.7–12, anything but the Mosaic Law, and the
reference to ‘the commandment’ is nevertheless a speciﬁc commandment – the
tenth – from the Law of Moses. After a period without the Law, the command-
ment is said in verse 9 to have ‘come’. Nevertheless, there are echoes not only
of Israel’s experience, but also of Adam and Eve, in such a way that Paul’s own
pre-Christian biography is also drawn in. As Chester has put it: ‘he creates a
fusion of the giving of the command not to eat in the Garden of Eden, the giving
of the Law at Sinai, and his own experience’.2

Knowledge: Although it is by no means the only role played by the Law in
Romans 7, the Law does have the revelatory function of providing knowledge.
Throughout Romans 7.7–25, there is an oscillation between the ‘I’, which in its
mind knows the Law, and the members which violate the Law. Verses 7 and 8
sketch the two aspects of the Law’s function in a way which will be elaborated
on further in the rest of the chapter:
      What then shall we say? Is the Law sin? By no means! But I did not know sin except
      through the Law. For I would not have known about covetousness unless the Law had
      said, ‘You shall not covet’. But sin seizing an opportunity through the commandment
      produced in me all kinds of covetousness. For apart from the Law, sin is dead.

Paul’s question is initially answered by the ﬁrst reference to the ‘I’, and the fact
that the Law is a conditio sine qua non for ‘knowing’ sin. This is probably not a
reference to participation in sin, but rather of recognizing what is determined as
sin. Without the word of the Law, it is impossible to identify sin and righteous-
ness. This knowing good and evil happens in the ‘mind’ of the ‘I’, such that ‘I
agree that the Law is good’ (7.16), and ‘I delight in the Law of God according to

   2. S. J. Chester, Conversion at Corinth: Perspectives on Conversion in Paul’s Theology and
the Corinthian Church (London: Continuum, 2003), p. 187 n. 129.
       GATHERCOLE Sin in God’s Economy: Agencies in Romans 1 and 7 161

my inner man’ (7.22). This is ‘the Law of my mind’ (7.23). In summary, despite
the depiction of the ‘wretched man’ under the Law in Romans 7, that wretch was
still – because of the Law – in possession at some level of the knowledge of what
God required.

Deception: Of course, the revelatory function of the Law in Romans 7 is almost
eclipsed by the negative role it plays in the hands of Sin. There are a variety of
expressions used to refer to this particular aspect of Sin’s activity: it seizes a start
(7.8, 11), comes to life (7.9), and generates covetousness (7.8). Again, then, there
is an event which interrupts the knowledge given by God – here, however, the
emphasis in not on human culpability, but on the trickery of Sin.

Sinful Action: As in Romans 1, in the wake of a meta-level event involving Sin,
there are subsequent, speciﬁc instances of sinfulness. The earliest mention is of
‘every desire’ which Sin produces (7.8). Then the references to ‘what I hate’ and
‘evil’ that are ‘done’ later on in the chapter refer to the same process (7.15, 17,
18, 19, 20).

Death: The ﬁnal result of sin in Romans 7 is again, as expected, death. This is
clear from the very compressed summary statement in 7.11: ‘For Sin seized a
start and deceived me through the commandment, and, through it, killed me’.
Similarly, the cry of despair from the wretched man is for deliverance ‘from this
body of death’ (7.24).

Conclusion
Most clearly, then, both depictions of the plight are predicated upon revelation
and knowledge at the beginning of the process, and sinful action and death at
the end. In the middle, the situation becomes more complicated; the agencies
involved in the production of sinful action will require more careful treatment.

                 2. Congruences and Contrasts in Romans 1 and 7
Having examined the common structure of the elements in Romans 1 and 7, the
focus will next be on the particular issues connected with agency and sin in the
two chapters. Here we will focus on elements (3) and (4) in the taxonomy above:
suppression/exchange leading to sinful action in Romans 1, and deception lead-
ing to sinful action in Romans 7.3

2.1. Romans 1
As noted above, at the outset of Paul’s discussion in Romans 1.18–32 there is
the assumption that humanity is guilty of a meta-sin – that of rejecting and sup-

   3. Justiﬁcation for synthesizing the schemas of these two chapters – if justiﬁcation is needed – can
readily be found in Romans 5.14, where it is implied that those under the Law sin as Adam did,
whereas those after Adam and before Moses did not. Here we see that the primeval ‘fall’ of Adam and
Eve has already been brought into association with sin under the Law in the life of the people of Israel.
162                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

pressing the revelation of God’s glory: ‘They knew God, but did not glorify, or
give thanks to, him as God’ (1.21). There is no discussion of what it is about
the human person which makes him or her able to sin, or predisposed toward
rebellion against God. It is simply an observable fact which is not theorized. The
images of agency used by Paul to describe the rebellion are varied. There is inac-
tivity, in that there is no attempt made to grasp the truth of God’s glory and to
respond in worship – this despite the fact of the clarity of God’s glory. On the
other hand, this inactivity goes hand-in-hand with an aggressive suppression. As
far as agency is concerned, both the inactivity and the active suppression (which
for Paul are both aspects of the same reality) are unambiguously attributed to the
humanity under indictment.
    It is commonly observed that there is in Romans 1 what Klostermann called
‘die adäquate Vergeltung’,4 a theme which is worth exploring since it offers
valuable insight into the relation between divine and human agency in Paul’s
thought, and the comments of commentators thus far can be considerably sup-
plemented. We will treat Rom. 1.24, 28 and 26 in this unusual order since 1.26
is both very controversial as well as very fruitful for our theme. In fact, the key
argument here is that the situation into which God hands over sinners is one
which precisely highlights the meta-sin of the exchange of God’s glory for
idolatry.
    In Rom. 1.22–24, we see the ﬁrst instance of Paul’s understanding of the rela-
tionship between wrath and sin which has perplexed commentators:
      Claiming to be wise, they became foolish, and they exchanged the glory of the
      immortal God for the image of a likeness of a mortal human being, and of birds and
      animals and snakes. Therefore God gave them over to the desires of their hearts to
      uncleanness, to dishonour their bodies with one another.

The concept of ironic measure-for-measure punishment can easily be seen in this
sequence. The action of the sinful human beings itself has an ironic element – a
reversal whereby their desire is for the exact opposite of what it should be:
      x    their exchange consists of getting ‘a likeness of an image’ (GP QOQK-
           YOCVK GKMQPQL) in place of ‘glory’ (FQECP), the contrast being between
           what is insubstantial – indeed, being ‘an image of a likeness’, it is
           doubly removed from the reality of the object of an already misguided
           worship – and what is ‘weighty’;5
      x    in place of the immortal one, they choose mortal objects of worship
           (CHSCTVQWHSCTVQW);
      x    in place of God, they serve people, birds, animals and snakes (SGQW
           CPSTYRQW MCK> RGVGKPY`P MCK> VGVTCRQFYP MCK> GTRGVY`P).
As a result of this, God repays according to deeds in 1.24 in two particularly
notable ways: (a) they are handed over ‘to uncleanness’ (GKL CMCSCTUKCP), which

  4. Cf. E. Klostermann, ‘Die adäquate Vergeltung in Röm 1,22–31’, ZNW 32 (1933), pp. 1–6.
  5. The contrast between God’s kabod and the nature of idols in the OT and Jewish tradition is a
commonplace.
       GATHERCOLE Sin in God’s Economy: Agencies in Romans 1 and 7 163

corresponds particularly well with the construction of gods made in the form of
things such as serpents, which are of course unclean; (b) their abandonment of
God’s glory results in the dishonouring of their bodies.6
   In Rom. 1.28, a similar pattern is evident:
      And just as they did not think God worthy (QWM GFQMKOCUCP VQ>P SGQP) of knowing, he
      handed them over to an unthinking mind (GKL CFQMKOQP PQWP), to do what is not ﬁtting.

This is an expansion of the idea in 1.22. The measure-for-measure is difﬁcult to
capture in an English translation; it is hard to render FQMKOC\Y (‘distinguish as
worthy’) in a way which corresponds with CFQMKOQL (‘which cannot distinguish
what is worthy’). God punishes the action of not considering him worthy with a
mind that cannot consider whether something is worthy or not.
   In Rom. 1.25–27, we come to an area where commentators often run over the
issue which we are concerned with, for reasons which are obvious.
      They exchanged the truth of God for a lie, and worshiped and served creature rather than
      creator, who is to be praised forever, Amen. Therefore, God gave them over to shameful
      passions, for their women exchanged natural practice for that which is contrary to
      nature, and similarly, men also abandoned natural practice with women and burned with
      passion for one another – men committing shameful acts with other men, and receiving
      in themselves the corresponding penalty which was necessary for their error.

There are clearly a great number of controversial issues here, hardly any of
which relate speciﬁcally to the theme in hand. At the most basic level, the ironic
correspondence between idolatry and homosexual practice is expressed by the
verb ‘exchange’ (OGVCNNCUUY/OGVCNNCVVY). Human beings have exchanged
(OGVJNNCECP) the truth of God for a lie, and subsequently have exchanged
(OGVJNNCECP) natural for unnatural pratice.
    It is sometimes further observed that there is some sort of connection in that
the unnatural worship of idols corresponds somehow with unnatural sexual
activity.7 This is particularly pertinent in light of Paul’s statement in Gal. 4.8:
‘But then, you did not know God, but served those ‘gods’ which by nature are
not such’. Paul thus characterizes paganism prior to conversion as serving ‘gods
who are by nature (HWUGK) not gods’. There may well, then, be a connection
between the meta-sin of idolatry and the divine handing-over to that which is
‘against nature’ (RCTCA HWUKP).
    However, it is not particularly clear from Romans 1 that this is in view. Rather,
there is a relation between idolatry and homosexual practice which is much more
clearly at work in this particular argument. The key correspondence lies in the fact
that both involve turning away from the ‘other’ to the ‘same’. Although the nature
(understood as that which is determined by God) argument is certainly valid, it
does not explain as much, perhaps, as the in se model. The greater scope of this
latter model is apparent from the fact that Paul uses it in connection with both the

  6. FQEC and VKOJ are virtual synonyms, as the nearby 2.7 shows (cf. also the presence there of
CHSCTUKC).
  7. See for example T. R. Schreiner, Romans (Baker Exegetical Commentary on the New
Testament; Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1998), p. 94.
164                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

meta-sin of idolatry (worshipping ‘creation, rather than creator’) and in the par-
ticular instantiation of homosexual practice (GKL CNNJNQWL CT  UGPGL GP CT  UGUKP).
In 1.25, creation worships creation, rather than creator; that is to say, it turns away
from God, and worships itself. This leads, correspondingly, to a similar structure
of sexual relationships: men give up sexual activity with women for passion ‘for
each other’ (1.27). To put it another way:
       Humanity should be oriented toward God but turns in on itself (Rom. 1.25).
       Woman should be oriented toward man, but turns in on itself (Rom. 1.26).
       Man should be oriented toward woman, but turns in on itself (Rom. 1.27).

The meta-sin of creation turning in on itself toward self-worship, then, leads to
sexual relationships which mirror this same turn in se.
    This line of reasoning is conﬁrmed by Paul’s emphatic phrase ‘receiving back
the corresponding repayment which their sin demanded’ (VJ>P CPVKOKUSKCP JP
GFGK VJL RNCPJL CWVY`P GP GCWVQKL CRQNCODCPQPVGL) in 1.27. This explicitly
draws attention to the fact that the divine penalty here corresponds very clearly to
the sin of idolatry. The verb CRQNCODCPY is the ﬁrst element which highlights a
correspondence between the grounds for the charge and the ensuing punishment:
according to LSJ, the word has the sense, as one might expect, of ‘receive what
is one’s due’, or ‘regain, recover’ – it is correlative to CRQFKFYOK, the word Paul
uses for God’s repayment according to deeds in Rom. 2.6.8 Secondly, the two
elements of the compound CPVKOKUSKC conjure up a picture of a mirror-image
response. This comes out explicitly in the only other NT occurrence of the term,
in 2 Cor. 6.11–13:
       Corinthians, our hearts have been wide open (RGRNCVWPVCK); … so in return (VJ>P FG>
       CWVJ>P CPVKOKUSKCP) – I speak to you as children – open your hearts wide (RNCVWPSJVG)
       also to us.

The GFGK in Rom. 1.27 reinforces this point that there is a close correspondence
between the human sinful attitude on the one hand, and the divine action on the
other. The relationship which Paul construes between idolatry and homosexuality
is a perfect illustration, then, of ironic measure-for-measure punishment in that
the incurvatus in se of worship (Rom. 1.25) results in the incurvatus in se of sex
– a rejection of the other in preference for the same.
    What then is the character of the RCTGFYMGP? God’s ‘handing over’ here is
his personal action whereby, without withdrawing his presence, he gives the con-
demned what they want – with the reward ironically corresponding in some way
to the sin of idolatry – but with the result that it ends up compounding the divine
judgment. (It may well be that the ‘handing over’ implies a giving of the con-
demned over to their desires considered as enslaving powers, though this is not
certain.) This is by no means a dictionary deﬁnition of RCTCFKFYOK, but is rather
an attempt to describe the process in this very particular context. To elaborate
brieﬂy on the deﬁnition, it is personal, in that the action here is not merely an
immanent process of cause-and-effect, but is the product of the ‘the wrath of

  8.    LSJ, p. 205.
       GATHERCOLE Sin in God’s Economy: Agencies in Romans 1 and 7 165

God from heaven’ (1.18).9 Similarly, God is not merely leaving his creatures
here to their own devices; rather, he is portrayed by Paul as an agent in the proc-
ess.10 Two partial analogies from the Old Testament illustrate this. Numbers 11
provides a parallel to the ironic character of the measure-for-measure judgment,
and 1 Samuel 8 offers an analogy to the enslaving domination of the gift given by
God in response to ungodly desire.11
   Numbers 11 has not really been sufﬁciently explored for its relevance to
Romans 1. Some scholars do note the relevance of Num. 11.31–35: ‘he [Paul]
probably has in mind another classic example of human craving which brought
divine wrath upon it (Num 11.31–35) which is twice referred to in the Psalms
with the formula that God gave them their desire’, quoting Pss. 78.29 and 106.14–
15.12 This ﬁrst point, that God’s wrath consists in giving them their desire, is
important to note. There is more to be said, however: conﬁning discussion to
11.31–35 misses out one of the most important elements. The most neglected
point is that Numbers 11 uses the same kind of catch-word irony as Paul later
will in Romans 1. When the people complain of not having any meat, this brings
about YHWH’s wrath (wOp,)a) (11.1). When YHWH gives the Israelites what they
desire, they will have meat not for one day, not for two days, nor ﬁve days, nor
even ten or twenty days (11.19), but ‘for a month of days, until it comes out of
your noses (Mkep;,)am') and becomes loathsome to you’ (11.20). Milgrom points
out (following Ibn Ezra) the catch-word irony here: wrath and nose are obviously
the same word because the latter is metaphorical for the former.13 A further
reference comes in the consummation of God’s wrath at the end of the chapter,
when the quail arrives: ‘And the wrath (P)a) of the Lord burned against them’
(11.33). In conclusion, then, God’s wrath in the quail incident at Kibroth Hat-
taavah has two elements: (a) it gives the sinful Israelites what they want, but also
(b) manifests itself with a measure-for-measure punishment which has an ironic
character to it.
   In 1 Samuel, Israel did not consider YHWH’s kingship as worthy of accept-
ance, therefore God gave them over to a rule which would tyrannize them. At the
beginning of the chapter, the elders of Israel gather before Samuel, asking him
to ‘appoint for us a king to judge us like all the nations’ (8.5). This displeases

   9. For more on this point, see S. J. Gathercole, ‘Justiﬁed by Faith, Justiﬁed by his Blood: The
Evidence of Rom. 3.21–4.25’, in D. A. Carson, P. T. O’Brien and M. A. Seifrid (eds.), Justiﬁcation
and Variegated Nomism, vol. 2: The Paradoxes of Paul (WUNT; Tübingen: Mohr, 2004), pp. 147–
84 (pp. 169–75).
   10. Cf. J. D. G. Dunn, Romans 1–8 (Word Biblical Commentary; Waco, TX: Word Books,
1988), p. 63: ‘The rationale is, presumably, that God does not retain control over those who do not
desire it; he who wants to be on his own is granted his wish’.
   11. A number of the commentators on Romans 1 point out the very similar uses of some of
Paul’s vocabulary in other writers. Standard parallels are the reference in Ps. 81.13, which is also
picked up in Acts 7.42 (GU
                           VTG[GP FG> Q SGQ>L MCK> RCTGFYMGP CWVQW>L NCVTGWGKP VJ^ UVTCVKC^ VQW
QWTCPQW). But this is about as far as most commentators get.
   12. Dunn, Romans 1–8, p. 62.
   13. J. Milgrom Numbers (JPS Torah Commentary; Philadelphia/New York: Jewish Publication
Society, 1990), p. 88.
166                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

Samuel, and rightly so, for in God’s answer to Samuel’s prayer, God reveals that
this request from the people is a symptom of their rebellion – ‘they have rejected
me from being king over them’ (8.7). But God tells Samuel to grant their request,
while also making it clear to the people what it is that they have asked for: ‘He
[Samuel with the words of the Lord] said, “These will be the ways of the king
who will reign over you: he will take your sons and appoint them to his chariots
and to be his horsemen and to run before his chariots… He will take your daugh-
ters to be perfumers and cooks and bakers. He will take the best of your ﬁelds
and vineyards and olive orchards and give them to his servants… He will take
the tenth of your ﬂocks, and you shall be his slaves. And in that day you will cry
out because of your king, whom you have chosen for yourselves, but the Lord
will not answer you in that day”’ (8.11, 13–14, 17–18). There are some key
phrases which crop up which might point to an element of measure-for-measure
punishment here: because they are the kind who ‘serve other gods’ (8.8), God
will make them ‘servants’ (in a negative sense) to this king which they are so
keen to have (8.17). But this irony is clearly not as strong as in Numbers 11 and
Romans 1.14 The key point for our purposes is that we do nevertheless have God
giving the Israelites what they want, with this desire turning out to be a curse
rather than a blessing for Israel.
   To repeat our deﬁnition, the process is God’s personal action whereby,
without withdrawing his presence, he gives the condemned what they want – with
the reward ironically corresponding in some way to the sin of idolatry, and per-
haps with the result that – like the monarchist Israelites – they are enslaved/
governed by what they are given. We noted above that in the meta-sin of rebel-
lion, human agency is pitted in direct opposition to the divine action of revelation.
Here, however, it is the very same events which are attributed simultaneously to
both divine and human agency. The human agents may of course be now entirely
unconscious that their turn to idolatry was in ﬂagrant opposition to divine
revelation, which ignorance Paul explains in terms of their darkened minds.
Again, like Joseph’s brothers (cf. Gen. 50.20) or Herod and Pilate (cf. Acts 4.27–
28), they are equally unaware that in their present sinful behaviour they are
acting in conjunction with God.

2.2. Romans 7
Our reading of Romans 7 here corresponds in outline to the excellent recent
treatment of Chester, and will further develop elements of his interpretation.15
Essentially, on Chester’s line, Rom. 7.7–25 is a piece of biographical recon-
struction. In it, Paul describes life under the Law, and with the beneﬁt of hindsight

   14. Similarly, there is a kind of measure-for-measure judgment in Genesis 3, but again the
linguistic irony is not clear. One could, however, draw attention to the fact that as a result of
persuading Eve to eat yrp (Gen. 3.2–3), the serpent is condemned to eat rp( (3.14); similarly, God
says to Md) that as a result of his sin, the hmd) is cursed (Gen. 3.17).
   15. Chester, Conversion at Corinth, pp. 183–95. Chester’s analysis draws in part (especially on
7.7–13) on that of G. Theissen, in Psychological Aspects of Pauline Theology (Edinburgh: T&T
Clark, 1987).
       GATHERCOLE Sin in God’s Economy: Agencies in Romans 1 and 7 167

articulates the dichotomy between, on the one hand, the conscious ‘I’ which
delights in the Law and perceives that it is obeying that Law, and on the other,
the unconscious process whereby the agent is actually disobeying the Law under
the inﬂuence of Sin. This dichotomy was not perceived as such by Paul before
his ‘conversion’ – it is only having been liberated from life under the Law that he
now realizes what was the case in his previous condition.16 So for example, Rom.
7.15: ‘For I do not know what I do; for I do not do what I want – rather, I do what
I hate’. Here Paul does not describe opposing desires that warred within him, but
rather that he thought that he was doing good even as in reality he was sinning.
In fact, the ‘I know’ (IKPYUMY) in 7.15 makes better sense on this reading: the
more obvious reading of Paul’s statement Q ICAT MCVGTIC\QOCK QW IKPYUMY is
not ‘I do not understand why I do what I do’, but rather, ‘I do not know what I
am accomplishing’. The verb MCVGTIC\QOCK generally has the nuance not only
of doing, but of the end-product (‘bringing about’) of the action, as indeed it does
in Rom. 7.8 and 13.
   The principal difference here in Romans 7 from the account of agency in
Romans 1 consists, then, in the complication of the additional actors: Sin and
the Law. The humanity so active in Romans 1 by contrast appears as virtually
objectiﬁed in ch. 7: it ‘knows’ (7.7, 18), was alive, but died (7.9–10), ‘agrees’
with the Law and ‘delights’ in it, and ‘wants’ one thing and ‘hates’ another (7.15
et al.). However, presumably because the ‘I’ has been taken captive (7.23), it has
very little in the way of agency. Similarly, the Law itself does very little: it
comes (7.9) and speaks (7.7); again, because it is under the control of the far
stronger ‘Sin’, it accomplishes nothing of what – at one level – is its God-given

   16. It may appear that the person in Romans 7 who delights in God’s Law is the authentic, inner
person, in contrast to the inauthentic, outer person. Thus Bultmann: ‘In Rom. 7.22, “inner” is man’s
real self (das eigentliche Ich) in contrast to the self that has come under the sway of sin’ (R. Bultmann,
Theology of the New Testament. Translated by K. Grobel [2 vols.; New York: Charles Scribners Sons,
1951], vol. 1, p. 203). (Although criticism of Bultmann here is only partially justiﬁed, because of the
particular meaning he gives to ‘eigentlich’.) However, it would be odd for Paul to hold that the real
person was not under the domination of Sin. In Greek tradition, ‘interiority’ has to do with the process
of thinking, and not with authentic personality (unless for the author the two were synonymous).
HTJP, the midriff, is home to the HTGPGL (the ‘wits’), frequently designated as ‘inside’ the person:
‘Phaeacians, how does this man appear to you, now that you have seen his appearance and greatness,
and witnessed his HTGPCL GPFQP?’ (Odyssey 11.337); cf. Euripides’ Orestes 1514, where Orestes
accuses his Phrygian interlocutor of speaking one thing with the tongue, but thinking something
different inside (VCPFQP QWM QWV  Y HTQPY`P). It is not just a given, but a desideratum that someone’s
HTGPGL are inside them. In Aeschylus, Agamemnon 1052, Clytemnestra is conﬁdent of persuading
Cassandra as long as the latter’s HTGPGL are within her. By contrast, if someone has lost their wits, the
HTGPGL are no longer ‘inside’: ‘What is this thing you are intending? Are your HTGPGL not inside you,
that you leave me abandoned with these my children?’ (Euripides, Heracleidae 709–10; cf. Pindar
Odes 7.47). This is perhaps connected to the idiom familiar in the NT of GEKUVJOK in reference to being
‘out of one’s mind’ (Mk 3.21; 2 Cor. 5.14 etc.) – LSJ notes in classical Greek the phrases HTGPY`P
CHGUVCPCK, GMUVJPCK or OGSGUVCPCK as referring to ‘losing one’s wits’. The HTGPGL, then, or one’s
‘inside’, is simply the faculty of thought: for a similar judgment (‘the organ of thinking’), see H. D.
Betz, ‘The Concept of the “Inner Human Being”’, NTS 46.3 (2000), pp. 315–41 (323). So Paul’s
phrase in Romans 7.22 is just another way of talking of the conscious ‘I’, and is synonymous with the
PQWL of 7.23 and 7.25. It is not the authentic person as opposed to the outward person.
168                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

task of leading to life (7.10; cf. 8.3). The agency of God is mentioned brieﬂy in
7.13, but we will return to this later. The agent who dominates most of chapter 7
is clearly the mysterious ﬁgure ‘Sin’.
    Although at one point it was dead, Sin has now seized an opportunity for
action (the CHQTOJ>P NCDQWUC in 7.8, 11), and come alive (7.9). Thus it deceives
(7.11), and has produced (MCVGKTICUCVQ) desire and death (7.8, 13; cf. 7.11).
Paul in Rom. 7.7–13 envisages, then, a primeval ‘once’ in which Sin was dead
(7.8) and humanity was alive (7.9). This perhaps echoes the situation in Gen. 2.7,
where ‘the Lord God formed the man of dust from the ground and breathed into
his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living creature’. This is of
course prior to the commandment not to eat in Gen. 2.17.17 In this primeval
situation of life, Sin has no power to deceive and kill: this is surely the sense in
which Sin is ‘dead’ apart from the Law in Rom. 7.8. However, God paradoxically
provides the opportunity for Sin to deceive and kill by giving the commandment.
    What account best describes the action(s) of Sin and the Law in Romans 7?
Three operations – although the heuristic division is rather artiﬁcial – seem to
be at work.
    First, Sin affects the way in which the Law is perceived by ‘me’: there is
probably truth in the conclusion of Das that ‘the ‘I’ sees the Law clothed in an
unrecognizable shape because of Sin’.18 In this respect, there is important over-
lap with Romans 1: the ‘suppression of the truth’, and the failure to glorify God
leading to the darkening of the mind and its inability to discern strongly resemble
the deception of the ‘I’ here in Romans 7.19 In support of Das’ point is the fact
that Sin’s deception does not simply work against the Law, but makes use of the
Law for its own purposes. Hence it is highly likely that Sin’s corruption extends
to the way in which the Law appears to ‘my’ mind.
    Second, as a result, Sin affects the way in which the human response to the
Law appears to the mind of the agent. Chester again rightly argues that the motif
of ‘deception’ in Rom. 7.11 strongly suggests that ‘the pre-conversion self por-
trayed in Rom. 7 [is] a victim of unrecognised sin’.20 He understands the
deception to involve ‘a failure to recognise certain actions as transgressions of
that commandment’.21 The reference to ‘me’ as having the knowledge of what
constitutes sin (7.7) strongly suggests that when ‘I’ am deceived into disobeying
in 7.11, that disobedience is not perceived as contravention of the Law. Similarly,
the tension between the ‘I’ and ‘Sin’ throughout 7.14–25 strongly supports
Chester’s reading here. Sin, then, presents a picture to ‘me’ that Sin’s own work

   17. We have already noted how Paul’s discussion of Sin co-opting the commandment in Rom.
7.8–11 seems to arise out of his interpreting Israel’s history against the background of Genesis 2–3:
his use of the action of the serpent in Genesis 3 seems to provide a good deal of content to his
argument in Romans 7.
   18. A. A. Das, Paul and the Jews (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2003), p. 165.
   19. I am grateful for Stephen Chester’s prompting on this point: ‘Suppression/exchange in ch. 1
and deception in ch. 7 are related to each other in that they both issue in human inability to
recognize sin for what it is’. (Private letter, 13 July 2004.)
   20. Chester, Conversion at Corinth, p. 186.
   21. Ibid.
      GATHERCOLE Sin in God’s Economy: Agencies in Romans 1 and 7 169

is in fact entirely consonant with the Law. In other words, sin is at this stage not
recognized as sin at all.
    Finally, the end product is that Sin has provoked the very desire which the
commandment prohibits. That is to say, Sin generates the polar opposite of the
will of God through the speciﬁc content of the commandment. Sometimes
Rom. 7.7–8 is explained by an appeal to general human obstinacy, whereby any
command will make one want to do the opposite: psychologists use the language
of ‘contra-suggestibility’.22 This approach to Romans 7, however, is probably not
what Paul has in mind here: it is, in any case, not a universal phenomenon. Some
light on this, however, can be shed by Rom. 8.7: ‘For the mind of the ﬂesh is
hostility to God; it does not submit to the Law of God, nor can it do so’. This
statement by Paul suggests that the concern in Rom. 7.7–8 is not with general
commands that human beings balk at, but speciﬁcally with divine commands.
Since ‘the mind of the ﬂesh is hostility to God’, with the advent of the command
from God ‘you shall not covet’, Sin leaping into action to produce every kind of
covetousness is comprehensible. (This also suggests, incidentally, that the realm
of the mind is for Paul certainly a sphere of agency and responsibility.)
    In conclusion, then, the actor given most attention in Rom. 7.7–25 is the
personiﬁed ﬁgure of Sin, although we will see in Part 3 that Paul considers God
to have the decisive role in the chapter. The Law’s operation is entirely passive,
though its function is crucial, ﬁrst (implicitly) as the gift of God, and then ex-
plicitly as an instrument in the hands of Sin. Humanity in Romans 7, inter-
estingly, is considerably objectiﬁed. As noted above, there is some scope for
seeing ‘Sin’ as, in part, a human attribute when Romans 7 is read in the light of
8.7. Beyond this, however, it is difﬁcult to draw any more deﬁnite conclusions.

Conclusion
Here, then, the focus has been on the different ways in which Romans 1 and 7
depict the process of sinful action. In the former, the focus was very much on the
human rebellion succeeded by the divine judgment which brought about sinful
human actions. This condemnation is predominantly revealed in God’s measure-
for-measure judgment, not least as the turn in se of idolatry is mirrored in the
turn in se in fallen sexual practice in the chapter. In Romans 7, by contrast, the
prime mover in the process of disobedience is the personiﬁed ﬁgure of ‘Sin’,
whose main instrument is the Law. Thus, although there are some elements of a
common framework to the two chapters (as seen in Part 1) the two portrayals of
sinful action have very different foci. We turn in Part 3, however, to see the
common deep structure to both.

                        3. Paul’s ‘Evangelical’ View of Sin
This ﬁnal part is concerned with how both Romans 1 and Romans 7 place the
history of sin, as shaped by divine action, into the broader framework of God’s

  22. See e.g. J. A. Ziesler, Romans (London: SCM Press, 1989), p. 176; J. R. W. Stott, Romans
(Leicester: IVP, 1994), p. 203.
170                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

economy by – paradoxically – assigning it a revelatory function. What both
chapters have in common is that God is depicted in both accounts as using the
history of sin for revelatory purposes. In Romans 1, the divinely moulded instan-
tiations of sin are ‘the revelation of God’s wrath from heaven’ against the idola-
try of humanity; in Romans 7, God’s overarching purpose in Sin’s use of the
Law is so that Sin might be shown up in its true colours.

3.1. Romans 1
We have already explored the issue of measure-for-measure judgment in Romans
1. What has not yet been touched on here is what Paul means by subsuming all the
divine actions of ‘handing over’ there under the ‘revelation of the wrath of God’
(Rom. 1.18). There is even a clear parallel between the revelations in Romans 1:
      For the righteousness of God is revealed in it [in the gospel]…
      For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against…

Such a close parallel with revelation of God’s saving power in the gospel in
Rom. 1.17 has led commentators such as Cranﬁeld to conclude that the locus of
revelation of the wrath of God is also the gospel.23 There is a sense in which this
is true, as we shall see. But the wrath of God in Rom. 1.18 seems in the ﬁrst
instance to describe the activity in 1.23–31.24 Paul is portraying individual sinful
actions as the revelation of God’s wrath. The divine handing over is – for those
who have eyes to see – God’s disclosure of his hatred of human idolatry.
    Second, this revelatory function is underscored by the measure-for-measure
aspect of the judgment. The measure-for-measure element in the judgment is
not only an aspect of judgment, but also functions to show up the nature of the
meta-sin of idolatry. As we have seen, the particular instantiations of sin in
Rom. 1.22–31 precisely mirror the ‘fall’ in which humanity suppressed the
glory of God. Thus, the individual sins reveal more clearly the structure of the
primeval ‘exchange’.
    The question remains – revealed to whom? It may well be the case that Romans
1–2 envisages a Jewish interlocutor who would heartily endorse the verdict that
God hands Gentile sinners over to the particularly egregious sins of chapter 1.25
But Rom. 1.18–32 is actually an implicit condemnation of ‘all the ungodliness and
unrighteousness of people who suppress the truth in unrighteousness’, a point
which is made clear in Rom. 2.1–2. This universality of sin is precisely what is not
clear to Paul’s Jewish interlocutor. In fact, that God’s judgement has come on all
human sin in this way is only apparent from the perspective of the gospel.26

   23. C. E. B. Cranfield, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans
(ICC, New Series, 2 vols.; Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 1975), vol. 1, pp. 109–10.
   24. It is important to understand the connection between 1.16–17 and the following ICT in 1.18.
1.16–17 are not explicated by 1.18–32 above, but by the much larger unit including both 1.18–3.20
and the Heilsgeschichte following.
   25. See S. J. Gathercole, Where is Boasting? Early Jewish Soteriology and Paul’s Response in
Romans 1–5 (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2002), pp. 197–205.
   26. In this sense, the verdict that the gospel is the pre-condition for understanding the wrath of
God is correct.
      GATHERCOLE Sin in God’s Economy: Agencies in Romans 1 and 7 171

   Finally, the account of the history of sin in Rom. 1.18–3.20 is the background
against which the gospel should be understood, and therefore the backdrop against
which the revelation of God in the gospel should be interpreted. Presumably this
assumption underlies Paul’s whole decision to give a lengthy Verdammnis-
geschichte in Rom. 1.18–3.20 prior to the ‘but now’ in 3.21: the ‘but now’ of the
revelation of the righteousness of God cannot be understood apart from the prior
declaration that all – Jew and Gentile alike – are guilty. In sum, then, the history
of sin can truly be described as an aspect of the way in which God makes himself
known – it is, in God’s economy, the divinely ordained prologue to the revelation
of God’s righteousness.

3.2. Romans 7
Romans 7 is clearer still. The key statement comes in 7.13: ‘But Sin, in order that
it might be manifested as Sin, produced death in me through what was good, so
that Sin might become supremely sinful through the commandment’. The ﬁrst
purpose clause here – ‘in order that Sin might be manifested’ – is emphatically
not a part of the deliberate intention of Sin. It is not Sin’s goal to ‘appear as Sin’
– in fact, as we have seen, precisely the opposite is true. Sin’s purpose in Romans
7 is precisely to wreak havoc while covering its tracks, as we saw above in the
discussion of the motif of deception. Rather, the purpose referred to here is the
larger divine purpose. It is God’s purpose that through the activity of Sin in
bringing death, Sin might be shown up for what it is: that as it over-reaches itself
in becoming through the commandment ‘supremely sinful’, it becomes visible –
again, for those who have eyes to see.
   It is important to note here that what in Romans 7 triggers this process is
clearly a divine action – namely the giving of the Law. Thus the Law becomes
the key instrument whereby Sin is ultimately shown to be sinful. This is another
mechanism whereby Paul gives God a role in ‘handing over’ to Sin, without
attributing to him authorship of that sin. It is clear, though, that God paradoxi-
cally provides the opportunity for Sin to deceive and kill by giving the com-
mandment. Again, however, this is part of God’s larger purpose in which Christ
and the Spirit bring life where the Law failed (Rom. 8.1–4).

3.3. Synthesis: Paul’s Evangelical Understanding of Sin
Looking at the larger canvas of God’s action, then, we can see that for Paul, God
is intimately involved in the history of human sin. In both Romans 1 and 7, he
shapes human disobedience so that it serves a purpose in his economy – spec-
iﬁcally the purpose of revelation. In Romans 1, the massa perditionis of a
humanity under the meta-sin of rejection of the divine glory is all set within the
framework of the revelation of his wrath. God’s judgment issues forth in the
actions of that humanity, so that those actions function to reveal more fully the
nature of the meta-sin of the human suppression, and exchange, of God’s glory.
In Romans 7, this divine moulding takes a particular form within Israel. God
gives the Law so that as Sin surges with all its energy, it is shown up in all its
horror.
172                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

   We can see, then, that Romans 1 and 7 both ﬁt into the pattern which Paul
articulates elsewhere:
      For God has enclosed all in disobedience, in order that he might have mercy on all
      (UWPGMNGKUGP ICAT Q SGQ>L VQWL RCPVCL GKL CRGKSGKCP KPC VQWL RCPVCL GNGJUJ^ ).
      (Rom. 11.32)27

Paul here afﬁrms a kind of double predestination, in which human history is
described as determined in outline exclusively by God. Here, however, in con-
trast to texts such as 1QS 3–4, reprobation and election stand in series, rather
than in parallel: there is a clear logical sequence here of judgment on all then
mercy to all.28 The judgment, however, is not that of death or suffering per se,
but actually consists of sin itself – God shuts all up into ‘disobedience’. In Rom.
1.18–3.20, the announcement of God’s revelation of the nature of Sin serves as
essential to the understanding of the subsequent revelation of God’s righteous-
ness. Similarly, in Romans 11, the divine handing over of all to disobedience is
the background against which his mercy is to be seen.
   What is notable, then, is that we have in Romans 11 a statement from Paul of
the integral place of the history of sin with God’s economy which is in a sense
even more all-encompassing than both Romans 1 and 7. Paul, then, regards the
history of sin as integral to God’s history with humanity because as the Ver-
dammnisgeschichte is announced (as prologue to the Heilsgeschichte), it serves
the purpose of revelation. So, it might be said, Sin itself receives a measure-for-
measure punishment from God: although it sought precisely to suppress God’s
revelation, it is – against its own will – press-ganged into service as an agent of
that revelation.29




   27. Attention should also be drawn to the very similar expression in Gal. 3.22, as well as to
Rom. 5.20–21 in this regard.
   28. On the other hand, since Paul does not seem to be a universalist either, the ‘mercy on all’
needs to be seen in the light of the immediately preceding discussion of the place of Jews and
Gentiles in the economy of God. Thus the universality is a Jew + Gentile universality rather than a
salvation of every individual.
   29. In addition to the participants in the Aberdeen conference, I am particularly grateful to Prof.
John Webster (Aberdeen), Professor Ian McFarland (Emory University) and Dr Stephen Chester
(International Christian College, Glasgow), for their insightful readings of an earlier version.
Various questioners at the SBL Pauline Epistles group also stimulated me to think further on
particular issues.
                                          Chapter 10

               EPILOGUE: AN ESSAY IN PAULINE META-ETHICS

                                       J. Louis Martyn


                                          Introduction
When we attend to a broad range of Jewish and pagan writings from the Hel-
lenistic era, we are reminded that in several regards the Epicureans were quite
unlike other philosophical groups. They gave, for example, virtually no attention
to the relationship between divine acts and human ones. In their view the gods do
not demand obedience from human beings, thereafter rewarding the good and
punishing the evil. In fact, the Epicurean gods do not have the slightest interest in
human affairs. Freedom from superstitious fear comes, then, when one recog-
nizes that it is impossible either to please the gods or to offend them.
    To many other thoughtful people of the age, however, issues pertaining
to divine agency and human agency were of great importance, as we see in
the preceding chapters. Thinking deeply indeed about these issues, numerous
Jews and pagans engaged in sustained and vigorous debates over questions of
human autonomy and freedom, moral responsibility, divine providence and
determinism.1
    On the Jewish side such discussions are clearly reﬂected, for example, in the
Qumran scrolls (Alexander) and in Jewish wisdom writings such as Sirach
(Westerholm). Without pausing Josephus could even differentiate three Jewish
groups from one another by crediting them with different ideas about what is
determined by ‘Fate’ – fundamentally Josephus intended a reference to God –
and ‘what is up to us human beings’ (Barclay; Bocaccini). In the pagan world,
Stoics, Cynics and Epicureans engaged in endless discussions of determinism
and human freedom.2 Indeed, in describing the three Jewish sects Josephus


    1. In The Invention of Autonomy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), J. B.
Schneewind makes a learned and impressive case for crediting Kant with the invention of ‘auton-
omy’, properly speaking. The writings of Sirach and Epictetus sufﬁce in themselves, however, to
indicate the wisdom of our using the term to refer to some patterns of thought found in the Hellenis-
tic era. Note also that in speaking of the rabbis, F. Avemarie justly employs the word frequently, as
does A. A. Long in his sterling interpretation of Epictetus: Epictetus (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
2002).
    2. See especially the magisterial treatment in S. Bobzien, Determinism and Freedom in Stoic
Philosophy (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998).
174                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

borrowed much of his vocabulary and philosophical frame of reference from
those pagan discussions, ‘what is up to us’ (ta eph’ hêmin) having become in
Josephus’ time a technical expression for human autonomy, especially among the
Stoics.
   The fundamental rationale behind the present volume lies in the fact that these
wide-ranging and vigorous discussions formed a signiﬁcant part of the context in
which Paul did his own thinking and writing about the acts of God and the acts of
human beings. I say ‘a signiﬁcant part’ because the grand setting in which Paul
pondered issues of agency included not only the Jewish sages and popular
philosophers of the Hellenistic era, but also the bards and prophets of ancient
Israel, the authors of what Paul himself called hê graphê (Watson). Paul’s educa-
tion may even have included faint shades of the great ﬁgures of truly ancient
Greece. When, then, we reread his letters, asking about his views of divine and
human agency, we sense that we can truly hear his voice only when we also take
into account the voices of other moral theologians and ethicists of his time, and
of earlier eras as well.
   In the present work, then, we have listened to some of those thinkers in their
own right, afterwards turning to Paul. The task of the epilogue is to revisit the
essays, in order to reread in their light some of the sources on which they them-
selves draw. Can we in that way clearly identify a few of the major issues?
   I begin with a word about an apparently innocuous matter that on examination
proves to be of importance. Regarding the human agent’s moral ability, several
of the essayists draw from their sources some rather surprising terms. Barclay,
for example, notes Philo’s use of the word ‘worthy’ to mean ‘capable’. Of course,
one cannot impose a standard terminology on ancient authors. It is possible, how-
ever, – after reading the essays – to make a suggestion designed to facilitate ease
and clarity of communication among ourselves. Is the Hellenistic era not marked
in general by two major images of the human agent, the competent and the incom-
petent, and do these not correspond to two dominant forms of the moral drama?


    1. Dominant Forms of the Hellenistic Moral Drama aside from Paul
a. The Self-Limiting Divine Agent and the Competent Human Agent
Especially pertinent to our subject are, of course, portraits of the two agents in
close relation to one another. Here we begin with God as omnipotent, a motif
throughout the Old Testament and common in both Jewish and pagan literature
of the Hellenistic era (for example, Cleanthes’ Hymn to ‘omnipotent Zeus…you
who with your law steer all things’). The complexity of the relationship between
the divine agent and the human one is doubly evident, then, in traditions in which
the omnipotent divine agent establishes a realm for human moral choice by ex-
plicitly or implicitly curtailing his own power, leaving room for the human agent
to respond to commands and exhortations.3 In general some degree of divine self-

   3. Here the essay of Engberg-Pedersen is of special interest. Early on he cites Epictetus, Diss.
4.1.100, a passage in which a distinction is drawn between ‘what God has given me for my own and
                MARTYN Epilogue: An Essay in Pauline Meta-ethics                                 175

limitation is implied precisely when the divine agent issues a command, as
happens in the garden of Eden (Gen. 2.15–17); and the classic Hebraic instance
occurs when, speaking for the self-limiting omnipotent divine agent, Moses says
to the human agent, Israel:
      I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that I have set before you life
      and death, blessing and curse; therefore choose life, that you and your descendants
      may live, loving the Lord your God, obeying his voice. (Deut. 30.19–20)

    As we see in several of the essays, the divine agent’s exhortation to choose
life brings with it the images of both agents that – leaving Paul aside for the
moment – are most widely encountered in literature of the Hellenistic era, the
self-limiting divine agent and the human agent who is competent to choose.4 For
in numerous regards that was an era of individualistic ‘choice’. And texts – both
Jewish and pagan – in which the divine agent urges the human agent to choose
life, virtue, happiness, etc. presume not only the self-limitation of God, but also
the competence of the human agent to choose.

The Competent Agent and The Two Ways. With impressive frequency the picture
of the competent human agent is combined with that of the two ways, producing
a moral synthesis that proved widely popular among Second Temple authors as
well as among pagan philosophers. In an embryonic form the pattern of the two
ways lies before us not only in Deut. 30.19–20, but also in Jer. 21.8, blossoming
then in the Greek Didache (Alexander).5 What I have called a widely popular
moral synthesis emerges, then, when the two-ways pattern is combined with the
image of the competent human agent.6 And no Second Temple author presents


subject to my authority’ and ‘what He has left for himself’. Epictetus can refer to the former as ta
proairetika, which – and I agree – Engberg-Pedersen renders ‘the objects of choice’. Calling for
emphasis is the pertinent pair of opposites stated by Epictetus in 4.1.101: What can be willed by the
human agent stands opposite what is not in the province of that agent’s will (ta mê thelêta). This
pair of opposites sufﬁces to remind us of the distinction between the divine agent and the human
one, a distinction that remains fundamental even though God is within the individual as well as in
the whole of the universe. The divine agent who gives to me what is ‘subject to my own authority’
is the very actor who retains other things ‘for himself’, thus clearly distinguishing himself from me,
while being in me. Important, then, for all Stoics is an awareness of the human agent’s moral com-
petence in an area bounded by divine decree, precisely ta proairetika. And that limitation of the
human agent proves to be a corollary of Epictetus’ tendency to emphasize theism over pantheism
(Long, Epictetus, pp. 148–49).
    4. The charge against Stoics that they abolished human choice and thus human responsibility
by their afﬁrmation of Fate elicited numerous and complex answers from Chrysippus onwards, but
it never went unanswered, chieﬂy by the insistence on bounded but emphatically genuine human
competence to be obedient to universal law. See again the truly extraordinary contribution of
S. Bobzien, Determinism and Freedom in Stoic Philosophy.
    5. Cf. H. van de Sandt, and David Flusser, The Didache: Its Jewish Sources and Its Place in
Early Judaism and Christianity (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002).
    6. Qumran reminds us that this immensely popular moral synthesis is not inevitable; the two
ways can be afﬁrmed in the context of a sort of determinism (Alexander). Second Temple
interpreters of Deut. 30.19–20, however, regularly present this moral synthesis to their readers, and
176                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

that moral synthesis more clearly and emphatically than Sirach, with his picture
of God placing the two ways before the Adamic human being, the agent who was
at creation endowed with moral competence by the divine agent himself:
      Do not say ‘It was [the Lord] who led me astray’ … From the beginning he created the
      human being, and he left him in the power of his own decision. If it is your will to do
      so, you will keep the commandments, and to act faithfully is a matter of your own
      choice. He has placed before you ﬁre and water; stretch out your hand for whichever
      you wish. Before human beings are life and death, and whichever an individual chooses
      will be given to him. (Sir. 15.12–17)7

The Competent Agent and The Two Separate Steps. Equally important is Sirach’s
way of ﬁlling out the picture of Deuteronomy 30. In order to emphasize the God-
given autonomy of the Adamic agent, Sirach clariﬁes the identities of both agents
by referring to their two sequential and separate steps.
    The ﬁrst step is that of the divine agent, and it contains four elements. God
acts by creating the human agent who is competent to choose, by placing before
that agent the two ways, life and death, by calling for a decision, and by after-
ward keeping his distance. The last element is emphasized by Sirach, and it calls
for our attention. Having endowed the human agent with moral competence, hav-
ing put the two ways before that agent, and having exhorted that agent to choose
life, the divine agent seems to go into a sort of retirement. He has apparently
ﬁnished his part in the moral drama. Indeed immediately after creating the com-
petent agent God ‘left him in the power of his own decision’, neither interfering
in the human agent’s subsequent autonomous choice nor taking measures to
improve that agent’s formation, as though such a move were needed.
    The second step follows. It is that of the human agent, and it provides a clear
indication of that agent’s identity. He is the Adamic agent created by God with
total moral competence. So equipped, and presented with the two possible paths,
he stands alone at the fork in the road, competent in himself to make his own
choice, and thereafter held responsible for his autonomous decision. This human
decision is the second step in the moral drama, but it is also much more than that.
It is also an emphatically separate act, separate, that is, from contemporary
activity on the part of the divine agent, and thus the human agent’s autonomous


it is equally common among the pagan philosophers. Note also the role of this moral synthesis in –
to cite two examples – the popular Prodicus fable about Heracles (Xenophon, Memorabilia 2.1.21–
2.1.33; Philo, Sact. 20–42) and Pseudo-Cebes. For an excellent translation of the latter, with
thoughtful notes, consult John T. Fitzgerald and Michael L. White, The Tabula of Cebes (Chico,
CA: Scholars Press, 1983). The authors give a well-conceived account of attempts to link Pseudo-
Cebes to one or another of the popular philosophical schools (pp. 20–27), ﬁnally noting similarities
to both Seneca and Epictetus.
    7. I follow here the Greek text. Note that Sirach portrays salvation as conditional on human
action, a matter carefully addressed in Watson’s essay and in his extraordinarily perceptive volume,
Paul and the Hermeneutics of Faith (London: T&T Clark, 2004). Modern Jewish scholars cus-
tomarily cite this passage in Sirach as the classic Jewish text for freedom of the will; e.g., H. Graetz,
‘Die Söhne des Tobias, die Hellenisten und der Spruchdichter Sirach’, Monatschrift für Geschichte
und Wissenschaft des Judentums 21 (1872), pp. 49–64, 97–122 (105).
                MARTYN Epilogue: An Essay in Pauline Meta-ethics                                  177

and separate response.8 For, as just noted, after creating the competent human
agent, and after addressing that agent with a hortatory reference to the two ways,
the divine agent has ﬁnished his work with the human agent.9
   In its dominant form, then, the Hellenistic moral drama places its accent on
the portrait of the human agent as the competent ﬁgure who, standing at the two
ways, is called on to make his own secondary and separate decision.10 Rather
than the divine agent, then, it is almost always the human agent facing the two
ways who provides the accented motif of movement in the moral drama, choosing
to go one way or the other. No literary form tells us more about the Hellenistic,
Second Temple era than hortatory and imperative paraenesis addressed to the
human agent whose task is to carry out an action distinctly separate – autono-
mous – from any contemporary act on the part of the divine agent.11

The Competent and Disobedient Human Agent. What happens in the Hellenistic
moral drama, then, when, in taking his own second and separate step, the human
agent is disobedient? Continuing a pattern notably evident in the Deuteronomic
history and often employed by the canonical prophets, many Jewish authors speak
of a call to ‘repentance.’ And meaning something quite similar, and using basi-
cally the same locutions, pagan writers refer to ‘turning.’ Again we have from
both Jew and pagan the widely popular moral synthesis: the competent human
agent presented with the two ways, often accompanied by the two separate
steps, with emphasis on the human agent’s movement. In itself disobedience
does not alter but rather conﬁrms the image of the competent human agent, for
it brings guilt and a renewed exhortation to choose and follow the path of moral
responsibility.

b. The Three-Actor Moral Drama and the Incompetent Human Agent
Taking us to one of the Qumran texts and to certain strands of the Enochic litera-
ture, the essays of Alexander and Bocaccini remind us of the Hellenistic image of
the incompetent agent. For the most part it is indeed in apocalyptic literature of
the Second Temple era that this image is developed. One would turn, then, from
the essays of Alexander and Bocaccini to the studies of what M. C. de Boer per-
ceptively dubbed ‘cosmological apocalyptic eschatology’, the major point being

   8. One might think the pattern of a second and separate step foreign to the Stoics because of
their believing God to be a contemporary actor within the human agent (see n. 28 below). They also
gave a crucial role, however, to ‘assent’ (sugkatathesis; adsensio), thus advancing their own form
of the two-step pattern.
   9. Sirach has his own eschatology – virtue and vice are rewarded and punished in this life – but
there is no hint, nor is one thought to be needed, that God will one day bring a better scene by
further fashioning the Adamic agent. On the contrasting text of Bar. 2.31 see n. 15 below.
   10. Widely evident in Second Temple texts, especially those that interpret Deut. 30.19–20, the
two-step pattern can also be seen in pagan literature. We have a non-theistic form in Epicurean
tradition (Lucretius, de Rerum Natura 2.251–293); and, as noted, it is basically present in the Stoics’
references to ‘assent’. See also the paraenetic pattern as it is developed in the Prodicus legend and
Pseudo-Cebes.
   11. See again the qualiﬁcation stated in n. 8 above.
178                         Divine and Human Agency in Paul

that in this pattern we have a moral drama with three principal actors rather than
merely two: God, human beings and supra-human powers other than God.12
   In the role of a supra-human power, Sin, for example, can be seen as more than
an act committed by the human agent; it can be the subject of verbs; it can even be
said to deceive the human agent. In the Enochic Book of the Watchers Sin is
antecedent to acts of human choice, being introduced by evil angels. Moreover, in
some of the traditions of ‘the evil impulse’ that entity possesses its own power
(Avemarie).13 When on the cosmic stage there are three actors rather than two, the
effects on the moral drama are obviously profound. In the three-actor drama there
are, for example and contra 4 Maccabees, powers beyond, and often superior to
the rational capacity of human beings.14 Especially from apocalyptic traditions we
have, then, a truly weighty question: Given incompetence on the part of the human
ﬁgure, will the divine agent remain inactive vis-à-vis that agent’s formation?15


             2. Paul: Similarities and Radical Departures – A Third
                    Anthropological Image and Meta-Ethics

Here we begin with two factors in the letters that seem in tension with one
another. On the one hand, we ﬁnd numerous paraenetic passages, some explicitly
hortatory, all focused primarily on what the recipients, as competent human
agents, are to do and to avoid doing. From several of the essays we see, then, that
considerable insight can be had into Paul’s mind by comparing and contrasting
his moral instructions with those of Jewish wisdom teachers and pagan popular
philosophers.16 As his paraenetic passages show, no development of any kind

    12. See M. C. de Boer, ‘Paul and Apocalyptic Theology’, Encyclopedia of Apocalypticism (ed.
J. J. Collins; New York: Continuum, 1998), pp. 345–83; idem, ‘Paul, Theologian of God’s Apoca-
lypse’, Interpretation (January, 2002), pp. 21–33; and cf. John J. Collins, ‘The Origin of Evil in
Apocalyptic Literature’, idem, Seers, Sibyls and Sages in Hellenistic-Roman Judaism (Leiden: E.J.
Brill, 2001), pp. 287–99; H. Lichtenberger, Studien zum Menschenbild in Texten der Qumrange-
meinde (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1980). In the present essay I use the term ‘apocalyp-
tic’ for the most part to refer to this three-actor cosmic drama.
    13. On ‘the evil impulse’ (e.g., 1QS 5.4–5; 1QH 10.23 [ysr bsr]) and 4 Ezra’s cor malignum
(3.20–23) see in addition to the essays of Avemarie and Bocaccini, Joel Marcus, ‘The Evil
Inclination in the Epistle of James’, CBQ 44 (1982), pp. 606–21; idem, ‘The Evil Inclination in the
Letters of Paul’, IBS 8 (1986), pp. 8–21.
    14. Were we surveying anthropological images beyond those portrayed in the present volume,
we could ask what happened in the Hellenistic era to traditions coming from the classical tragedi-
ans, Aeschylus, Euripides and Sophocles, with their portraits of human beings who are incompetent
in the sense of scarcely being in complete rational control of their own lives. We could note, for
example, that in speaking of Fate, Chrysippus referred to its being impossible for the parents of
Oedipus to avoid the evil that had been predicted (SVF 2.939).
    15. A pre-Pauline picture of the divine agent acting to re-form the incompetent human agent lies
before us in Baruch 2.31 – ‘In the land of their exile… I will give them a heart and ears that hear’ –
a text surely drawn from Jer. 24.7; 32.39 (O. H. Steck, Das apokryphe Baruchbuch [Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1993], p. 109). On 1QH 21 see n. 18 below.
    16. Beyond the essays in the present volume see especially A. J. Malherbe, ‘Hellenistic
               MARTYN Epilogue: An Essay in Pauline Meta-ethics                               179

eclipses Paul’s concern with patterns of behaviour in his churches, how the mem-
bers are to think and what they are to do.17
   On the other hand, we ﬁnd passages in which Paul places heavy emphasis not
on what human agents have done, are doing and are to do, but rather on what has
been done, is being done and will be done to them – both by powers other than
God and by God himself. Being to some degree peculiar to Paul, these references
seize our attention, suggesting a basic route by which we can rethink and remap
the apostle’s views of the divine and human agents.18
   That is to say, when we attend to what has been done, is being done and will
be done to the human agent – not limiting our horizon to God’s past deed of
creating/fashioning that agent – we ﬁnd that Paul works with multiple anthropo-
logical images. Indeed, there seem to be determinative events in what we might
call the history of the human agent, a matter that can be related to the standard
question – what does God do and what do human beings do? – while also being
signiﬁcantly different from it. Merely to reread Paul’s letters while entertaining
the expression ‘history of the human agent’ is to begin to suspect that a historical
series consisting of several images may be a central key, enabling us to bring
Paul’s understanding of agency into truly sharp focus (cf. Gathercole’s references
to the history of sin):
   1. Like Sirach and Epictetus, Paul knows of the Adamic agent who was cre-
ated/fashioned by God with moral competence (Rom. 1.19–20).
   2. From the competent Adamic agent God elects a speciﬁc people, Israel,
calling into existence a corporate and corporately addressable agent (Rom. 9.4–5;
3.2; 11.1–2, 28b). The apple of God’s eye, this people is, however, repeatedly
disobedient. Indeed, there is universal Adamic disobedience (Rom. 3.9–18; 11.32).
   3. Disobedient, the Adamic agent becomes without exception incompetent;
and, handed over by God to anti-God powers, this agent ﬁnds his incompetence
deepened (Rom. 1.21–28).19 From this point forward the entire series of images
proves to be fundamentally apocalyptic, in the sense that the human agent plays
his or her part in a three-actor moral drama, ‘the Flesh’ and ‘Sin’ (in the singu-
lar), for example, being the subjects of verbs, actors who do things. Now the


Moralists and the New Testament’, ANRW 2.26.1 (1992): 267–333; idem, Paul and the Popular
Philosophers (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1989); W. A. Meeks, The Origins of Christian Morality
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993).
   17. The English-language classic here remains V. P. Furnish, Theology and Ethics in Paul
(Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1968); see also W. Schrage, The Ethics of the New Testament
(Philadelphia: Fortress Press. 1988); R. B. Hays, The Moral Vision of the New Testament (San
Francisco: HarperCollins, 1996).
   18. It is primarily because of Bar. 2.31 (n. 15 above) and 1QH, as examples, that I say ‘to some
degree peculiar to Paul’. See the whole of 1QH 21, and especially lines 10 and 11. Having been
begun in the Community, the new creation of the human agent promised in Ezek. 36.26 is held to be
as yet incomplete (G. T. Manning, Echoes of A Prophet [London: T&T Clark, 2004], p. 50). Do we
not ﬁnd in Ezekiel, in Baruch, and in 1QH hints pointing, then, to a history of the human agent (a
matter to which we will shortly turn in our reading of Paul)?
   19. See B. R. Gaventa, ‘God Handed Them Over: Reading Romans 1:18–32 Apocalyptically’,
Australian Biblical Review 53 (2005), pp. 42–53; Martyn, Galatians, Comment #39.
180                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

human agent is not only disobedient but also thoroughly deceived by Sin and
thus universally enslaved to the powers of Sin and Death (Rom. 3.9; 6.6, 12–22;
7.11 in its context).20
    4. Given that development, the divine agent known to Paul does not remain
inactive, in the sense of doing virtually nothing more than repeating an exhor-
tation to repent (cf. the section on ‘Virtue as Gift’ in Barclay’s essay, especially
Philo’s reading of Deut. 30.15, 19). This is the God who is on the move. In the
gospel of Christ (for Paul an event) God steps on the scene. Far from allowing
the human agent to stand alone at the road fork, this invasive God powerfully
meets both the incompetent, enslaved agent and the powers that enslave him in
their own orb.21 God does that, however, not in a renewed word of exhortation,
but rather in the logos tou staurou, the totally strange word-event that shatters
‘the wisdom of the wise and the discernment of the discerning’, thus destroying
prior images of the human agent as well as old-age images of God (1 Cor. 1.18–
19).22 And in that meeting the divine agent does something unheard of. Destroy-
ing old-age images of the human agent, God changes human agency itself!23
That is to say, meeting the incompetent and enslaved human agent in the gospel
of his Son, God creates the corporate, newly competent and newly addressable
agent, forming this new human agent in the image of the cruciﬁed Son, Christos
estaurômenos, by sending the Spirit of the Son into its heart (Gal. 4.6; Rom.
8.29).24
    Nothing less than God’s new creation, this new human agent contains indi-
viduals, but, as was the case with ancient Israel, this agent is the new community
itself (1 Cor. 12.4–31), typically addressed by Paul with plural verbs, a pattern


   20. See M. C. de Boer, The Defeat of Death (Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press, 1988); P. W. Meyer, ‘The
Worm at the Core of the Apple’, ch. 5 in idem, The Word in This World (Louisville, KY: West-
minster/John Knox Press, 2004); and cf. again Gathercole in the present volume.
   21. Centered in God’s active, new-creative power, this meeting involves much more than God’s
holding out to the Adamic agent a new possibility/option. Concerning this crucial matter in Pauline
interpretation, see J. L. Martyn, Theological Issues in the Letters of Paul (Edinburgh: T&T Clark,
1997), p. 219 n. 23; idem, ‘De-apocalypticizing Paul: an Essay focused on Paul and the Stoics by
Troels Engberg-Pedersen’, JSNT 86 (2002), pp. 61–102; cf. Watson, Paul and the Hermeneutics of
Faith, pp. 464–65. Note also that, referring to far more than a new possibility, A. Badiou speaks of
an agent (he uses the term ‘subject’) who is induced by the process of truth, an agent that was
‘absolutely nonexistent “before” the event’ of truth (Ethics [London: Verso, 2001], p. 43).
   22. Analyses that skirt the plain sense of Paul’s repeated antithesis – ouk…alla (e.g., Gal. 1.1,
11–12; 1 Cor. 2.4) – always preserve in some form the mistakes of Pelagius and Arminius. For
strong correctives see S. Westerholm, Perspectives Old and New on Paul (Grand Rapids: Eerd-
mans, 2004) and Watson, Paul and the Hermeneutics of Faith, the ﬁrst part of which is appro-
priately titled ‘Antithesis’.
   23. Quoting Isaiah, while making no reference to Bar. 2.31 (n. 15 above) and Ezek. 36.26, Paul
says that God’s deed of changing the human agent itself is unprecedented (1 Cor. 2.9–16). There is,
however, a truly remarkable theological congeniality between Ezekiel’s eschatological portrait of
the newly competent agent and Paul’s picture of the same, a matter addressed in a forthcoming
work by the present author.
   24. On this corporate, newly created ‘addressable agent’ see Martyn, Galatians, pp. 447, 524–
36, 570–74.
                MARTYN Epilogue: An Essay in Pauline Meta-ethics                                 181

quite infrequent in Hellenistic paraenesis.25 The Israel of God (Gal. 6.16), this
newly competent and corporate agent, is the only agent that can be effectively
addressed with hortatory and imperative verbs; for, as noted, it is into the heart
of this agent that God has sent the Spirit of his Son, speciﬁcally the pneuma tou
estaurômenou, thus reforming the human agent by communally forming Christ in
that agent, the church (Gal. 4.19; Rom. 8.29). The newly created, corporate agent
is fundamentally distinguished, then, from the Adamic agent, the latter failing to
be – in Paul’s theology – addressable in paraenetic language. Here we ﬁnd a
sharp contrast with Sirach and Epictetus, both of whom – as Second Temple
and Hellenistic examples – address in the hortatory and imperative moods the
individual Adamic agent, the ﬁgure assumed to be competent as he stands before
the two ways.26
    When, being the newly addressable agent, and being conﬁdently exhorted to
do so, one of Paul’s churches corporately follows the lead of the Spirit – infused
by God into their hearts and thus already active among them (e.g., Gal. 5.16–26)
– it is indeed taking a second step after God’s ﬁrst step. But in Paul’s theology

    25. On Israel as corporate agent see now Paul M. Joyce, Divine Initiative and Human Response
in Ezekiel (Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press, 1989); J. S. Kaminsky, Corporate Responsibility in the Old
Testament (Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press, 1995); Jacqueline Lapsley, Can These Bones Live? The Problem
of the Moral Self in the Book of Ezekiel (BZAW; Berlin: W. de Gruyter, 2000). Numerous
specialized studies of Paul’s paraenetic sections are very helpful, but they are also often in need of
supplementation with regard to Paul’s departure from the emphatic individualism characteristic of
the Jewish sages (including Philo) and of popular philosophers such as Epictetus (not to mention
the individualism of the philosophers of our modern Enlightenment). If the analysis offered here
should prove essentially correct, Christian ethicists who wish to call on Paul will perhaps ask
themselves whether their work is to be reoriented to a considerable extent, shifting the primary
focus away from the individual Adamic agent of the sages and philosophers, in order to concentrate
on the newly competent agent who, inspired by the Spirit’s activity, is a thoroughly corporate
ﬁgure. Hence the reference in my title to ‘meta-ethics’. One step in this direction was taken by Paul
L. Lehmann, Ethics in a Christian Context (New York: Harper & Row, 1963), and it is further
developed by Nancy J. Duff, Humanization and the Politics of God: the Koinonia Ethics of Paul
Lehmann (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1992) and Philip G. Ziegler, ‘Justiﬁcation and Justice’,
Berliner Theologische Zeitschrift 21 (2004), pp. 140–53.
    26. If the moral synthesis of the competent Adamic agent and the two ways (with the two
separate steps included) proves to be fundamentally inapplicable to Paul – as is argued here – then a
number of truly learned treatises may be in need of some revision, e.g., W. A. Meeks, The Origins of
Christian Morality, a book from which I have learned much, and one which is altogether worthy of
its own analysis elsewhere. Here brieﬂy, on the one hand, there are the illuminating references to the
moral community into which the individual is ‘resocialized’. On the other hand, the ‘resocialized’
human agent apparently remains that individual who is faced with the two ways of virtue and vice,
these being options either of which he can choose to follow as an individual. If I am listening
attentively, we have, then, at least a partial eclipse of Pauline, corporate apocalyptic, in which the
third actor – in Gal. 5.19–23 the sarx and the pneuma – exerts its own power, producing in com-
munal life erga and karpos respectively. And in that eclipse is there not a sacriﬁce of Paul’s truly
extraordinary use of second-person plural hortatory language? See further Meeks, ‘The Circle of
Reference in Pauline Morality’, in D. L. Balch, E. Ferguson and W. A. Meeks (eds), Greeks,
Romans, And Christians: Essays In Honor of A. J. Malherbe (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1990),
pp. 305–17; and cf. the carefully nuanced study of Loveday Alexander, ‘Paul and the Hellenistic
Schools’, in T. Engberg-Pedersen (ed.), Paul in His Hellenistic Context (Minneapolis: Fortress Press,
1995), pp. 60–83.
182                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

that second step is emphatically not a separate step, one that is separate from the
continuing causative activity of the divine agent in the daily life of the commu-
nity. As God the Father has sent the Son’s Spirit into the hearts of members of
this newly created community, and as the divine agent continues to work won-
ders in this community (Gal. 3.5), so this God is very far indeed from placing the
communal human agent at the road fork and there leaving him alone to make his
own decisive response.27 In the process of creating the new human agent as the
new Spirit-led community, this invasive God consistently participates in human
morality itself.28
   Led by the Spirit, this communally competent agent is neither alone nor pas-
sive, being literally inspired and collectively called by God to vigorous, world-
wide activity; for, forming Christ in their communities, God places this com-
munal agent in the front trenches of his war of cosmic liberation for all (Gal. 4.6,
19; 2 Cor. 3.18; Gal. 5.13–6.10).29
   5. The ﬁnal image is that of the corporate human agent in God’s ultimate
apocalyptic victory (1 Thess. 4.13–18; 1 Cor. 15; Rom. 8; 11.26–32). Being in
the end all of what was the Adamic agent and emphatically all of God’s Israel,
this eschatological human agent will be the all, made alive in Christ and fash-
ioned in his image (Rom. 8.29 again).

                                            Conclusion
When, then, we focus our attention on the grand sweep of this series of images,
we sense that a single factor very nearly sufﬁces in itself to reveal the radical
disjunction between Paul’s moral drama and the dominant forms of that drama in
his time and culture, Jewish and pagan. That factor is precisely the monumental
difference between individualistic protological images of the human agent and

    27. Given the general meaning of the term ‘response’ in our linguistic setting, considerable care
has to be taken when we use it in our interpretation of Paul. If, that is, we employ that term to refer to
the human agent’s step at all, then it is important consistently to issue the caveat that this ‘response’,
although second, is not an autonomous human deed separate and alone from the continuation of the
divine agent’s causative activity. Behind Gal. 5.19–23 we can sense the pattern of the two ways, but
the acts of the sarx and of the pneuma tou Christou in the corpus of the community change that pattern
fundamentally, without turning the Galatians into puppets (note Gal. 5.24).
    28. In this regard there is a genuine and impressive similarity between Paul and Epictetus, for the
latter repeatedly insists to his students that, given God’s being in them, they are not alone (e.g., Diss.
1.14.13–14; cf. Seneca, Epistle on God in Man). See especially Long, Epictetus, pp. 147, 163–68, and
cf. Engberg-Pedersen in the present volume. For Paul, however, the active presence of the Spirit of
Christ in the corporate human agent, the church, relates agency to early Christian eschatology, not
to something comparable to Stoic protology; and the difference is monumental. For a quasi-
eschatological motif in Stoic teaching we turn not to Epictetus, but rather to the ﬁnal lines of
Cleanthes’ famous hymn, with their fascinating image of a prayed-for newly competent agent. Cf. J.
C. Thom, Cleanthes’ Hymn to Zeus (Tübingen: Mohr, 2005).
    29. Martyn, Galatians, comment #49. An important project for another setting: How is Paul’s
understanding of the human agent’s history related to his view of the church’s life in the civic,
Adamic society? Regarding the latter see especially V. P. Furnish, ‘Uncommon Love and the
Common Good’, in D. P. McCann and P. D. Miller (eds), In Search of the Common Good (London:
T&T Clark, 2005), pp. 58–87.
                MARTYN Epilogue: An Essay in Pauline Meta-ethics                                183

corporate eschatological ones.30 It is only at the ﬁnal apocalyptic victory that
God will have ﬁnished fashioning the human agent, for God’s present re-creation
of that agent en tô pneumati tou estaurômenou demonstrates what is fully deter-
mined but not yet ﬁnished: the chief concern of God for the entire cosmos (Rom.
8.18–25).




    30. I have said above that for Paul the corporate, newly competent and newly addressable agent
is formed by God in the image of the cruciﬁed Son, Christos estaurômenos (Rom. 8.29; cf. Gal.
4.19). The factor that sharply distinguishes protological images of the human agent from Paul’s
eschatological ones begins, then, in the cross; and in the true life of the church the cross is never
left behind, Christ’s resurrection at God’s hands being God’s active interpretation of the cross,
power made perfect in the weakness that is hyper hêmôn. One can imagine a volume that would
supplement the present one by being focused on the relationship between agency and the cross in
Paul, perhaps accenting texts from the Corinthian letters. Meanwhile, see C. B. Cousar, A Theology
of the Cross: The Death of Jesus in the Pauline Letters (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1990); A. R.
Brown, The Cross and Human Transformation (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1995); Martyn,
Theological Issues, pp. 89–110; R. A. Harrisville, Fracture: The Cross As Irreconcilable in the
Language and Thought of the Biblical Writers (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2006).
                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY

Albani, M., ‘Horoscopes in the Qumran Scrolls’, in P. W. Flint and J. C. VanderKam (eds), The
     Dead Sea Scrolls after Fifty Years: A Comprehensive Assessment (Leiden/Boston/Köln:
     E.J. Brill, 1999), II, pp. 279–330.
Albeck, C., Mishnah (Jerusalem: Devir, 1952–58).
Alexander, L., ‘Paul and the Hellenistic Schools’, in T. Engberg-Pedersen (ed.), Paul in His
     Hellenistic Context (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1995), pp. 60–83.
Alexander, P. S., ‘Physiognomy, Initiation and Rank in the Qumran Community’, in P. Schäfer,
     H. Cancik and H. Lichtenberger (eds), Geschichte – Tradition – Reﬂexion: Festschrift für
     Martin Hengel zum 70. Geburtstag, I (Tübingen: Mohr, 1996), pp. 385–94.
—‘The Redaction-History of Serekh ha-Yahad: A Proposal’, in F. García Martinez and
     E. Puech (eds), Hommage à Jozef T. Milik = Revue de Qumran 17 (1996), pp. 437–56.
—‘ “Wrestling against Wickedness in High Places”: Magic in the Worldview of the Qumran
     Community’, in: S. E. Porter and C. A. Evans (eds), The Scrolls and the Scriptures:
     Qumran Fifty Years After (Shefﬁeld: Shefﬁeld Academic Press, 1997), pp. 318–37.
—‘Demonology of the Dead Sea Scrolls’, in P. W. Flint and J. C. VanderKam (eds), The Dead
     Sea Scrolls after Fifty Years: A Comprehensive Assessment, II (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1999),
     pp. 331–53.
—‘Rules’, in: L. H. Schiffman and J. C VanderKam (eds), Encyclopaedia of the Dead Sea
     Scrolls (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), II, pp. 799–803.
—‘Torah and Salvation in Tannatic Literature’, in D. A. Carson, P. T. O’Brien and M. A.
     Seifrid (eds), Justiﬁcation and Variegated Nomism. Vol 1: The Complexities of Second
     Temple Judaism (Tübingen: Mohr, 2001), pp. 261–301.
—‘The Evil Empire: The Qumran Eschatological War Cycle and the Origins of Jewish Oppo-
     sition to Rome’, in S. M. Paul, R. A. Kraft, L. H. Schiffman and W. W. Fields (eds),
     Emanuel: Studies in Hebrew Bible, Septuagint and Dead Sea Scrolls in Honour of
     Emanuel Tov (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2003), pp. 17–31.
—The Mystical Texts (Companions to the Dead Sea Scrolls 7. London: T&T Clark Interna-
     tional, 2006).
—‘Qumran and the Genealogy of Western Mysticism’, in Esther G. Chazon (ed.), Proceedings
     of the Tenth Orion Conference on the Dead Sea Scrolls (Leiden: E.J. Brill, forthcoming).
—‘The Qumran Songs of the Sabbath Sacriﬁce and the Celestial Hierarchy of Dionysius the
     Areopagite: A Comparative Approach’, Revue de Qumran (forthcoming).
Alexander P. S., and G. Vermes, Serekh Ha-Yahad and Two Related Texts (DJD XXVI; Oxford:
     Clarendon Press, 1998).
Audet, J.-P., ‘Afﬁnités littéraires et doctrinales du Manuel de Discipline’, RevB 59 (1952), pp.
     219–38.
Avemarie, F., Tora und Leben: Untersuchungen zur Heilsbedeutung der Tora in der frühen
     rabbinischen Literatur (Texte und Studien zum Antiken Judentum, 55; Tübingen: Mohr
     Siebeck, 1996).
—‘Erwählung und Vergeltung. Zur optionalen Struktur rabbinischer Soteriologie’, NTS 45
     (1999), pp. 108–26.
Badiou, A., Ethics (London: Verso, 2001).
                                       Bibliography                                      185

Barclay, J. M. G., Jews in the Mediterranean Diaspora from Alexander to Trajan (Edinburgh:
       T &T Clark, 1996).
—‘Paul’s Story: Theology as Testimony’, in B. W. Longenecker (ed.), Narrative Dynamics in
       Paul: A Critical Assessment (London: Westminster/John Knox Press, 2002), pp. 133–56.
Barr, J., ‘The Question of Religious Inﬂuence: the Case of Zoroastrianism, Judaism and Chris-
       tianity’, JAAR 53 (1985), pp. 201–36.
Bauckham, R. J., ‘Apocalypses’, in Carson, D. A. P. O’Brien and M. Seifrid (eds), Justiﬁcation
       and Variegated Nomism. Volume 1: The Complexities of Second Temple Judaism (Tübin-
       gen: Mohr-Siebeck, 2001), pp. 135–87.
Baumgarten, J. M., ‘4Q205, Marriage or Golden Age Ritual?’, JJS 34 (1983), pp. 125–35.
—‘The Qumran-Essene Restraints on Marriage’, in L. H. Schiffman (ed.), Archaeology and
       History in the Dead Sea Scrolls (Shefﬁeld: Shefﬁeld Academic Press, 1990), pp. 13–24.
Becker, H.-J., Auf der Kathedra des Mose: Rabbinisch-theologisches Denken und antirab-
       binische Polemik in Matthäus 23, 1-12 (Arbeiten zur neutestamentlichen Theologie und
       Zeitgeschichte, 4. Berlin: Institut Kirche und Judentum, 1990).
Becker, A. H., and A. Y. Reed (eds), The Ways that Never Parted (TSAJ 95; Mohr Siebeck,
       2003).
Beer, G. (ed.), Mishnah MS Kaufmann (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1929).
Bell, R. H., No one seeks for God: An Exegetical and Theological Study of Romans 1.18–3.20
       (WUNT, 106. Tübingen: Mohr, 1998).
Bernstein, M., ‘The Employment and Interpretation of Scripture in 4QMMT: Preliminary
       Observations’, in J. Kampen and M. J. Bernstein (eds), Reading 4QMMT: New Perspec-
       tives on Qumran Law and History (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1996), pp. 29–52.
Betz, H. D., ‘The Concept of the “Inner Human Being” ’, NTS 46.3 (2000), pp. 315–41.
Betz, O., ‘The Qumran Halakhah Text Miqsat Ma‘asê Ha-TôrƗh (4QMMT) and Sadducean,
       Essene, and early Pharisaic Tradition’, in D. R. G. Beattie and M. J. McNamara (eds),
       The Aramaic Bible: Targums in their Historical Context (JSOTSup, Shefﬁeld: Shefﬁeld
       Academic Press, 1994), pp. 176–202.
Birnbaum, E., The Place of Judaism in Philo’s Thought.Israel, Jews, and Proselytes (Atlanta:
       Scholars Press, 1996).
Blenkinsopp, J., Sage, Priest and Prophet: Religious and Intellectual Leadership in Ancient
       Israel (Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1995).
Bloch, M., Apologie pour l’histoire. ou, Métier d’historien (Paris: Colin, 1949). ET by
       P. Putnam, The Historian’s Craft (New York: Knopf, 1953).
Bobzien, S., Determinism and Freedom in Stoic Philosophy (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998).
Boccaccini, G., Middle Judaism: Jewish Thought, 300 BCE to 200 CE (Minneapolis: Fortress
       Press, 1991).
—‘Middle Judaism and Its Contemporary Interpreters: Methodological Foundations for the
       Study of Judaisms, 300 BCE to 200 CE’, Henoch 15 (1993), pp. 207–34.
—‘The Preexistence of the Torah: A Commonplace in Second Temple Judaism, or a Later
       Rabbinic Development?’, Henoch 17 (1995), pp. 329–50.
—Beyond the Essene Hypothesis: The Parting of the Ways between Qumran and Enochic
       Judaism (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1998).
—‘Middle Judaism and Its Contemporary Interpreters: What Makes Any Judaisms a Judaism?’,
       Henoch 20 (1998), pp. 349–56.
—‘Esiste una letteratura farisaica del Secondo Tempio?’, Ricerche Storico-Bibliche 11.2
       (1999), pp. 23–41.
—Roots of Rabbinic Judaism: An Intellectual History, from Ezekiel to Daniel (Grand Rapids:
       Eerdmans, 2002).
—‘Qumran: the Headquarters of the Essenes or a Marginal Splinter Group’, in G. Boccaccini
       (ed.), Enoch and Qumran Origins (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2005), pp. 303–9.
186                       Divine and Human Agency in Paul

Boccaccini, G., (ed.), The Origins of Enochic Judaism (Turin: Zamorani, 2002 [= Henoch 24,
      2002]).
de Boer, M. C., The Defeat of Death (Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press, 1988).
—‘Paul and Apocalyptic Theology’, in J. J. Collins (ed.), Encyclopedia of Apocalypticism
      (New York: Continuum, 1998), pp. 345–83.
—‘Paul, Theologian of God's Apocalypse’, Interpretation (January, 2002), pp. 21–33.
Bonhöffer, A., Epiktet und das Neue Testament (Religions-geschichtliche Versuche und Vorar-
      beiten, 10; Giessen: Töpelmann, 1911).
—‘Epiktet und das Neue Testament’, ZNW 13 (1912), pp. 281–92.
—Die Ethik des Stoikers Epictet (Stuttgart, 1894). ET by W. O. Stephens, The Ethics of the
      Stoic Epictetus (New York: Peter Lang, 1996).
Bonsirven, J., Le judaïsme palestinien au temps de Jésus-Christ (2 vol.; Paris: Beauchesne,
      1934–35), II, pp. 3–105.
Boyce, M., Zoroastrians: their Religious Beliefs and Practices (London: Routledge & Kegan
      Paul, 1979), pp. 17–29.
Boyce, M., and F. Grenet, A History of Zoroastrianism. III. Zoroastrianism under Macedonian
      and Roman Rule (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1991), pp. 361–490.
Brooke, G. J., ‘The Explicit Presentation of Scripture in 4QMMT’, in M. Bernstein, F. García
      Martínez and J. Kampen (eds), Legal Texts and Legal Issues: Proceedings of the Second
      Meeting of the International Organisation for Qumran Studies (Leiden and New York:
      E.J. Brill, 1997), pp. 67–88.
Brown, A. R., The Cross and Human Transformation (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1995).
Buber S. (ed.), Eichah Rabbah (Vilna: Romm, 1899).
Bultmann, R., ‘Das religiöse Moment in der ethischen Unterweisung des Epiktet und das Neue
      Testament’, ZNW 13 (1912), pp. 97–110, 177–91.
—Theology of the New Testament (Ttrans. K. Grobel; New York: Charles Scribners’s Sons,
      1951).
Burkert, W., The Orientalizing Revolution: Near Eastern Inﬂuence on Greek Culture in the
      Early Archaic Age (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univeristy Press, 1992).
Carson, D. A., P. T. O’Brien and M. Seifrid (eds), Justiﬁcation and Variegated Nomism.
      Volume 1: The Complexities of Second Temple Judaism (Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck,
      2001).
Catto, S., ‘Does proseuchas poieisthai in Josephus’ Antiquities of the Jews 14.257-58 mean
      “Build Places of Prayer”?’, JSJ 35([2004), pp. 159–68.
Charlesworth, J. H. (ed.), The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
      1983–85).
—Rule of the Community and Related Documents (Princeton Theological Seminary Dead Sea
      Scrolls Project 1. Tübingen: Mohr, 1994).
Charlesworth, J. H., and C. A. Newsom, Angelic Liturgy: Songs of the Sabbath Sacriﬁce (The
      Princeton Theological Seminary Dead Sea Scrolls Project 4B. Tübingen: Mohr, 1999).
Chester, S. J., Conversion at Corinth: Perspectives on Conversion in Paul’s Theology and the
      Corinthian Church (London: Continuum, 2003).
Chialà, S., Libro delle Parabole di Enoc (Brescia: Paideia, 1997).
Cohen Stuart, G. H., The Struggle in Man Between Good and Evil: An Inquiry into the Origin
      of the Rabbinic Concept ofYeser Hara’ (Kampen: J.H. Kok, 1984).
Cohon, S. S., ‘Original Sin’, HUCA 21 (1948), pp. 275–330.
Collins, J. J., Between Athens and Jerusalem: Jewish Identity in the Hellenistic Diaspora (New
      York: Crossroad, 1986).
—The Apocalyptic Imagination: An Introduction to the Jewish Matrix of Christianity (New
      York: Crossroad, 1987).
—Jewish Wisdom in the Hellenistic Age (Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1997).
                                       Bibliography                                      187

—The Apocalyptic Imagination: An Introduction to Jewish Apocalyptic Literature (Grand
      Rapids: Eerdmans, 1998).
—‘The Origin of Evil in Apocalyptic Literature’, in idem, Seers, Sibyls and Sages in Helle-
      nistic-Roman Judaism (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001), pp. 287–99.
Cousar, C. B., A Theology of the Cross: The Death of Jesus in the Pauline Letters (Minneapo-
      lis: Fortress Press, 1990).
Cranﬁeld, C. E. B., A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans (ICC,
      New Series, 2 vol.. Edinburgh: T&T Clark International, 1975–1977).
Das, A. A., Paul and the Jews (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2003).
Davies, P. R., The Damascus Covenant: An Interpretation of the ‘Damascus Document’ (Shef-
      ﬁeld: JSOT Press, 1982).
—Behind the Essenes: History and Ideology in the Dead Sea Scrolls (Atlanta: Scholars, 1987).
Donaldson, T. L., Paul and the Gentiles: Remapping the Apostle’s Convictional World (Min-
      neapolis: Fortress Press, 1997).
Duchesne-Guillemin, J., ‘Le Zervanisme et les manuscrits de la Mer Morte’, Indo-Iranian
      Journal 1 (1957), pp. 96–99.
—‘Dead Sea Scrolls’, in Encyclopaedia Iranica 7 (1996), pp. 177–79.
Duff, N. J., Humanization and the Politics of God: the Koinonia Ethics of Paul Lehmann
      (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1992).
Dunn, J. D. G., Romans 1–8 (Word Biblical Commentary. Waco, TX: Word Books, 1988).
—The Partings of the Ways Between Christianity and Judaism and Their Signiﬁcance for the
      Character of Christianity(London: SCM Press, 1991).
—The Epistle to the Galatians (BNTC; London: A. & C. Black, 1993).
—‘4QMMT and Galatians’, NTS 43 (1997), pp. 147–53.
—The Theology of Paul the Apostle (Edinburgh: T&T Clark International, 1998).
Dunn, J. D. G. (ed.), Jews and Christians: The Partings of the Ways, AD 70 to 135 (Grand
      Rapids: Eerdmans, 1992).
Dupont-Sommer, A., ‘L’instruction sur les deux Esprits dans le Manuel de Discipline’, Revue
      de l’Historire des Religions 142 (1952), pp. 5–35.
Engberg-Pedersen T., Paul and the Stoics (Edinburgh: T&T Clark International, 2000).
—‘Response to Martyn’, JSNT 86 (2002), pp. 103–14.
—‘The Relationship with Others: Similarities and Differences Between Paul and Stoicism’,
      ZNW 96 (2005), pp. 35–60.
Engberg-Pedersen T. (ed.), Paul beyond the Judaism/Hellenism Divide (Louisville, KY:
      Westminster/John Knox Press, 2001).
Epstein, J. N., and E. Z. Melamed (eds), Mekhilta de-R. Shimon ben Yohai (Jerusalem: Hillel
      Press, 1955).
Finkelstein, L. (ed.), Sifre on Deuteronomy (Berlin: Jüdischer Kulturbund, 1939).
Finkelstein, L. (ed.), Sifra MS Assemani 66 (New York: Jewish Theological Seminary, 1956).
Fletcher Louis, C. H. T., The Glory of Adam: Liturgical Anthropology in the Dead Sea Scrolls
      (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2002).
Fisch, M., Rational Rabbis: Science and Talmudic Culture (Bloomington: Indiana University
      Press, 1997).
Fitzgerald, J. T., and M. L. White, The Tabula of Cebes (Chico, CA: Scholars Press, 1983).
Furnish, V. P., Theology and Ethics in Paul (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1968).
—‘Uncommon Love and the Common Good’, in D. P. McCann and P. D. Miller (eds), In
      Search of the Common Good (London: T&T Clark International, 2005), pp. 58–87.
García Martínez, F., The Dead Sea Scrolls Translated: The Qumran Texts in English (Leiden:
      E.J. Brill; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2nd edn, 1996).
Garcia Martinez, F., and J. Trebolle Barrera, The People of the Dead Sea Scrolls (Leiden: E.J.
      Brill, 1995).
188                       Divine and Human Agency in Paul

Garin, E., ‘Osservazioni preliminari a una storia della ﬁlosoﬁa’, GCFI 38 (1959), pp. 1–55.
Gathercole, S. J., Where is Boasting? Early Jewish Soteriology and Paul’s Response in Romans
      1–5 (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2002).
Gathercole, S. J., ‘Justiﬁed by Faith, Justiﬁed by his Blood: The Evidence of Rom 3.21–4.25’,
      in D. A. Carson, P. T. O’Brien and M. A. Seifrid (eds), Justiﬁcation and Variegated
      Nomism. Volume 2: The Paradoxes of Paul (WUNT; Tübingen: Mohr, 2004), pp. 147–
      84.
Gathercole, S. J., ‘Torah, Life, and Salvation: Leviticus 18:5 in Early Judaism and the New
      Testament’, in C. A. Evans and J. A. Sanders (eds), From Prophecy to Testament: The
      Function of the Old Testament in the New (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2004), pp. 131–
      50.
Gaventa, B. R., ‘God Handed Them Over: Reading Romans 1:18-32 Apocalyptically’, Austra-
      lian Biblical Review 53 (2005), pp. 42–53.
Gnoli, G., ‘Dualism’, Encyclopaedia Iranica 7 (1996), pp. 576–82.
Goldin, J., The Living Talmud: The Wisdom of the Fathers and Its Classical Commentaries
      (New York: New American Library, 1957).
Gowan, D. E., ‘Wisdom’, in D. A. Carson, P. T. O’Brien and M. A. Seifrid (eds), Justiﬁcation
      and Variegated Nomism. I. The Complexities of Second Temple Judaism (Tübingen:
      Mohr-Siebeck, 2001), pp. 215–39.
Graetz, H., ‘Die Söhne des Tobias, die Hellenisten und der Spruchdichter Sirach’, Monatschrift
      für Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judentums 21 (1872), pp. 49–64, 97–122.
Grabbe, L. L., Priests, Prophets, Diviners, Sages: A Socio-Historical Study of Religious Spe-
      cialists in Ancient Israel (Valley Forge: Trinity Press International, 1995).
—Judaic Religion in Second Temple Judaism (London: Routledge, 2000).
Hammer, R. (trans.), Sifre: A Tannaitic Commentary on the Book of Deuteronomy (Yale
      Judaica Series, 24; New Haven, London: Yale University Press, 1986).
Harrington, D. J., Invitation to the Apocrypha (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1999).
Harrison, J., Paul’s Language of Grace in its Graeco-Roman Context (WUNT; Tübingen:
      Mohr Siebeck, 2003).
Harrisville, R. A., Fracture: The Cross As Irreconcilable in the Language and Thought of the
      Biblical Writers (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2006).
Hayman, A. P., Sefer Yesira: Edition, Translation and Text-Critical Commentary (Tübingen:
      Mohr, 2004).
Hays, R. B., The Moral Vision of the New Testament (San Francisco: HarperCollins, 1996).
Hengel, M., Judaism and Hellenism: Studies in their Encounter in Palestine during the Early
      Hellenistic Period (ET John Bowden, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1974).
Himmelfarb, M., Tours of Hell: An Apocalyptic Form in Jewish Christian Literature (Phila-
      delphia: Fortress Press, 1985).
Hoffmann, D. (ed.), Midrash Tannaim (Berlin: Itzkowski, 1908–9).
Horovitz, H. S. (ed.), Siphre ad Numeros (Leipzig: Gustav Fock, 1917).
Horovitz, H. S., and I. A. Rabin (eds), Mekhilta (Frankfurt: Kauffmann, 1931).
van der Horst, P. W., ‘A Note on the Evil Inclination and Sexual Desire in Talmudic Lit-
      erature’, in U. Mittmann-Richert et al. (eds), Der Mensch vor Gott (Festschrift
      H. Lichtenberger; Neukirchen-Vluyn: Neukirchener Verlag, 2003), pp. 99–106.
Hruby, K., Aufsätze zum nachbiblischen Judentum und zum jüdischen Erbe der frühen Kirche
      (Arbeiten zur neutestamentlichen Theologie und Zeitgeschichte, 5. Berlin: Institut Kirche
      und Judentum, 1996).
Hultgård, A., ‘Das Judentum in der hellenistich-römischen Zeit und die iranische Religion – ein
      religionsgeschichtliche Problem’, in ANRW II.19.1 (Berlin and New York: W. de Gruyter,
      1979), pp. 512–90.
Jaffee, M. S., Early Judaism (Upper Saddle River: Prentice-Hall, 1997).
                                       Bibliography                                      189

Jastrow, M., A Dictionary of the Targumim, the Talmud Babli and Yerushalmi, and the
      Midrashic Literature (London: Luzac & Co., 1903).
Jenson, P. P., Graded Holiness: A Key to the Priestly Conception of the World (JSOTSup 106.
      Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld Academic, 1992).
Lasker, D. J., ‘The Obligation of the “Parapet” and Moral Responsibility’, in C. H. Manekin
      and M. M. Kellner (eds), Freedom and Moral Responsibility: General and Jewish
      Perspectives (Bethesda: University Press of Maryland, 1997), pp. 153–64.
Lieberman, S. (ed.), Tosefta Ki-Fshutah: A Comprehensive Commentary on the Tosefta (4 vol.;
      New York: Jewish Theological Seminary, 1955–88).
Johnson, E. E., and D. M. Hays (eds), Pauline Theology Volume 4: Looking Back, Pressing On
      (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1997).
Joyce, P. M., Divine Initiative and Human Response in Ezekiel (Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press, 1989).
Kaminsky, J. S., Corporate Responsibility in the Old Testament (Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press, 1995).
Kennedy, H. A., A. Philo’s Contribution to Religion (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1919).
Klostermann, E., ‘Die adäquate Vergeltung in Röm 1,22-31’, ZNW 32 (1933), pp. 1–6.
Kohler, K., Grundriss einer systematischen Theologie des Judentums auf geschichtlicher
      Grundlage (Leipzig: Gustav Fock, 1910).
Knibb, M. A. The Qumran Community (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987).
Kuhn, K. G., ‘Die Sektenschrift und die iranische Religion’, ZTK 49 (1952), pp. 296–316.
Laato, T., Paul and Judaism: An Anthropological Approach (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1995).
Lange, A., Weisheit und Prädestination: Weisheitliche Urordnung und Prädestinatiom in den
      Textfunde von Qumran (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1995).
Lapide, P., and P. Stuhlmacher, Paul: Rabbi and Apostle (Minneapolis: Augsburg, 1984).
LaPorte, J., Eucharistia in Philo (New York/Toronto: Edwin Mullen Press, 1983).
Lapsley, J., Can These Bones Live? The Problem of the Moral Self in the Book of Ezekiel
      (BZAW; Berlin: W. de Gruyter, 2000).
Lauterbach, J. Z. (ed.), Mekilta de-Rabbi Ishmael. 3 Volumes (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication
      Society of America, 1976 [= 1933]).
Leaney, A. R. C., The Rule of Qumran and its Meaning: Introduction, Translation and Com-
      mentary (London: SCM Press, 1966).
Licht, J., The Rule Scroll: A Scroll from the Wilderness of Judaea, 1QS, 1QSa, 1QSb, Text,
      Introduction and Commentary (Jerusalem: Bialik Institute, 1965) [Hebrew].
—‘An Analysis of the Treatise on the two Spirits in DSD’, in C. Rabin and Y. Yadin, (eds),
      Scripta Hierosolymitana IV: Aspects of the Dead Sea Scrolls (Jerusalem: Magnes Press,
      1970), pp. 88–100.
Lichtenberger, H., Das Ich Adams und das Ich der Menschheit: Studien zum Menschenbild in
      Römer 7 (WUNT, 164; Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2004).
Lichtenberger, H., Studien zum Menschenbild in Texten der Qumrangemeinde (Göttingen:
      Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1980).
—‘Zu Vorkommen und Bedeutung von yetser in Jubiläenbuch’, JSJ 14 (1983), pp. 1–10.
Lehmann, P. L., Ethics in a Christian Context (New York: Harper & Row, 1963).
Leibowitz, J., ‘Zur Zentralfrage: Wie verhält sich der Mensch zu Gott?’, in M. Stöhr (ed.),
      Lernen in Jerusalem – Lernen mit Israel (Veröffentlichungen aus dem Institut Kirche
      und Judentum, 20. Berlin: Institut Kirche und Judentum, 1993), pp. 118–29.
Lim, T. H., ‘The Alleged Reference to the Tripartite Division of the Hebrew Bible’, RQ 77
      (2001), pp. 23–37.
Long, A. A., Epictetus. A Stoic and Socratic Guide to Life (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002).
Longenecker, R. N., Galatians (Waco, TX: Word Books, 1990).
McKeon, R., ‘The Development and the Signiﬁcance of the Concept of Responsibility’, Revue
      internationale de philosophie 11 (1957), pp. 3–32.
Malherbe, A. J., Paul and the Popular Philosophers (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1989).
190                      Divine and Human Agency in Paul

—‘Hellenistic Moralists and the New Testament’, ANRW II.26.1, 268–333.
Mandelbaum, B. (ed.), Pesiqta de-Rav Kahana (New York: Jewish Theological Seminary,
      1962).
Manekin, C. H., ‘Introduction’, in idem and M. M. Kellner (eds), Freedom and Moral Respon-
      sibility: General and Jewish Perspectives (Bethesda: University Press of Maryland,
      1997), pp. 1–17.
Manning, G. T., Echoes of A Prophet [London: T&T Clark International, 2004).
Marcus, J., ‘The Evil Inclination in the Epistle of James’, CBQ 44 (1982), pp. 606–21.
—‘The Evil Inclination in the Letters of Paul’, IBS 8 (1986), pp. 8–21.
Margulies, M. (ed.), Midrash Rabbah Wayyiqra (Jerusalem: American Academy for Jewish
      Research, 1953–60).
Martone, C., La ‘Regola della Communità’ (Torino: Silvio Zamorani, 1995).
Martyn, J. L., Galatians. A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary (AB; New
      York. Doubleday, 1997).
—Theological Issues in the Letters of Paul (Edinburgh: T&T Clark International, 1997).
—‘De-apocalypticizing Paul: An Essay focused on Paul and the Stoics by Troels Engberg-
      Pedersen’, JSNT 86 (2002), pp. 61–102.
Meeks, W. A., ‘On Trusting an Unpredictable God: A Hermeneutical Reﬂection on Romans 9–
      11’, in J. T. Carroll, C. H. Cosgrove and E. E. Johnson (eds), Faith and History (Fest-
      schrift P. W. Meyer. Atlanta: Scholars, 1990), pp. 105–24.
—‘The Circle of Reference in Pauline Morality’, in D. L. Balch, E. Ferguson and W. A. Meeks
      (eds), Greeks, Romans, And Christians: Essays In Honor of A. J. Malherbe (Minneapolis:
      Fortress Press, 1990), pp. 305–17.
—The Origins of Christian Morality (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993).
Metso, S., The Textual Development of the Qumran Community Rule (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1997).
Meyer, P. W., ‘The Worm at the Core of the Apple’, in idem, The Word in This World (Louis-
      ville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press, 2004).
Merrill, E. H., Qumran and Predestination: A Theological Study of the Thanksgiving Hymns
      (STDJ 8; Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1975).
Michaud, H., ‘Un mythe zervanite dans un des manuscrits de Qumrân’, VT 5 (1955), pp. 137–
      47.
Milgrom J., Numbers (JPS Torah Commentary; Philadelphia/New York: Jewish Publication
      Society, 1990).
Moffatt, J., Grace in the New Testament (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1931).
Monteﬁore, C. G., Judaism and St. Paul (London: Goschen, 1914).
Moore, G. F., Judaism in the First Centuries of the Christian Era: The Age of the Tannaim
      (3 vol.; Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1927–30).
—‘Fate and Free Will in the Jewish Philosophies according to Josephus’, HTR (1929), pp. 371–
      89.
Nickelsburg, G. W. E., 1 Enoch 1: A Commentary on the Book of 1 Enoch, Chapters 1-36. 81-
      108 (Hermeneia; Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2001).
—Ancient Judaism and Christian Origins: Diversity, Continuity, and Transformation (Min-
      neapolis: Fortress Press, 2003).
—‘Enoch, First Book of’, ABD 2: 508–516.
Neusner, J., ‘Judaism in a Time of Crisis: Four Responses to the Destruction of the Second
      Temple’, Judaism 21 (1972), pp. 314–27 (317).
—Judaism as Philosophy: The Method and Message of the Mishnah (London: The Johns
      Hopkins University Press, 1999).
Noack, C., Gottesbewusstsein: Exegetische Studien zur Soteriologie und Mystik bei Philo von
      Alexandria (WUNT; Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2000).
Philonenko, M., ‘La doctrine qoumrânienne des deux esprits: ses origines iraniennes et ses
                                        Bibliography                                         191

      prolongements dans le judaïsme essénien et le christianisme antique’, in G. Widengren,
      A. Hultgård, M. Philonenko (eds), Apocalyptique Iranienne et Dualisme Qoumrânien
      (Paris: Adrien Maisonneuve, 1995), pp. 163–211.
Rabin, C., The Zadokite Documents (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1954).
Räisänen, H., Paul and the Law (Tübingen: Mohr, 1983).
—‘Legalism and Salvation by the Law’ (1980), idem, The Torah and Christ: Essays in German
      and English on the Problem of the Law in Early Christianity (Helsinki: Finnish Exegeti-
      cal Society, 1986), pp. 25–54.
Rendell Harris, J., Fragments from Philo Judaeus (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
      1886).
Romm, D. et al., Talmud Bavli (Vilna: Romm, 1880–86).
Sacchi, P., Jewish Apocalyptic and Its History (Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press, 1997).
—History of the Second Temple (Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press, 2000).
—‘Qumran e la datazione del Libro delle Parabole di Enoc’, Henoch 25.2 (2003), pp. 149–66.
Safrai, S., ‘And All Is According to the Majority of Deeds’, Tarbiz 53 (1968–69), pp. 33–40.
Sagi, A., ‘Models of Authority and the Duty of Obedience in Halakhic Literature’, AJS Review
      20 (1995), pp. 1–24.
Saldarini, A. J., Pharisees, Scribes and Sadducees in Palestinian Society (Wilmington: Michael
      Glazier, 1988).
Sanders, E. P., Paul and Palestinian Judaism (London: SCM Press, 1977).
Sandmel, S., ‘Parallelomania’, JBL 81 (1962), pp. 1–13.
—The Genius of Paul (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 3rd edn, 1979).
van de Sandt, H., and D. Flusser, The Didache: Its Jewish Sources and its Place in Early Juda-
      ism (CRINT; Assen: Royal Van Gorcum; Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2002).
Schäfer, P., and H.-J. Becker (eds), Talmud Yerushalmi (Tübingen: Mohr, 1991–2001).
Schechter, S., Some Aspects of Rabbinic Theology (New York: Schocken Books, 1965).
Schechter, S. (ed.), Avot de-R. Nathan (Vienna: Lippe, 1887).
Schiffman, L. H., ‘Miqsat Ma‘aseh Ha-Torah and the Temple Scroll ’, RevQ 14 (1990), pp.
      435–57.
—Reclaiming the Dead Sea Scrolls: The History of Judaism, the Background of Christianity,
      the Lost Library of Qumran (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1994).
Schneewind, J. B., The Invention of Autonomy.A History of Modern Moral Philosophy (Cam-
      bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
Schoeps, H. J., Paul: The Theology of the Apostle in the Light of Jewish Religious History
      (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1961).
Schrage, W., The Ethics of the New Testament (Philadelphia: Fortress. 1988).
Schreiner, T. R., Romans (Baker Exegetical Commentary on the New Testament. Grand Rapids:
      Baker Book House, 1998).
Schürer, E., The History of the Jewish People in the Age of Jesus Christ, 175 B.C.–A.D. 135, III.1
      (rev. and ed. G. Vermes, F. Millar and M. Goodman; Edinburgh: T.&T. Clark, 1993).
Segal, A. F., Rebecca’s Children: Judaism and Christianity in the Roman World (Cambridge
      MA: Harvard University, 1986).
Shaked, S., ‘Qumran and Iran: Further Considerations’, Israel Oriental Studies 2 (1972), pp.
      433–46.
—‘Iranian inﬂuence on Judaism: First century B.C.E. to second century C.E.’, in W. D. Davies
      and L. Finkelstein (eds), The Cambridge History of Judaism, I (Cambridge: Cambridge
      University Press, 1984), pp. 308–25.
Sharp, C. J., ‘Phinehan Zeal and Rhetorical Strategy in 4QMMT’, RevQ 18 (1997), pp. 207–22.
Skehan, P. W., and A. A. Di Lella, The Wisdom of Ben Sira: A New Translation with Notes
      (AB; New York: Doubleday, 1987).
Steck, O. H., Das apokryphe Baruchbuch (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1993).
192                      Divine and Human Agency in Paul

Stegemann H., ‘Zur Textbestand und Grundgedanken von 1QS III,13-IV,26’, RevQ13 (1988),
       pp. 95–131.
Stern, M., Greek and Latin Authors on Jews and Judaism, II (Jerusalem: Israel Academy of
       Sciences and Humanities, 1981), pp. 416–22.
Stone, M. E., Fourth Ezra: A Commentary on the Book of Fourth Ezra (Hermeneia, Minnea-
       polis: Fortress Press, 1990).
Stott, J. R. W., Romans (Leicester: IVP, 1994).
Stowers, S., A Rereading of Romans (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1994).
Strawson, P. F., Freedom and Resentment, and other essays (London: Methuen, 1974).
von Stuckrad, K., Das Ringen um die Astrologie: Jüdische und christliche Beiträge zum
       antiken Zeitverständnis (Berlin and New York: W. de Gruyter, 2000), pp. 193–214.
Tanner, K., God and Creation in Christian Theology. Tyranny or Empowerment? (Oxford:
       Blackwell, 1988).
Theissen, G., Psychological Aspects of Pauline Theology (Edinburgh: T&T Clark International,
       1987).
Theodor, J., and C. Albeck (eds), Genesis Rabbah (Berlin: Itzkowski, 1912–36).
Thom, J. C., Cleanthes’ Hymn to Zeus (Tübingen: Mohr, 2005).
Urbach, E. E., The Sages: The Concepts and Beliefs (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
       Press, 1995).
VanderKam, J. H., Enoch and the Growth of an Apocalyptic Tradition (CBQMS 16;
       Washington: Catholic Biblical Association of America, 1984).
—Enoch: A Man for All Generations (Columbia: University of South Carolina, 1995).
Vawter, B., Job and Jonah: Questioning the Hidden God (New York: Paulist Press, 1983).
Vermes, G., The Complete Dead Sea Scrolls in English (London: Penguin, 2004).
Watson, F. B., Paul and the Hermeneutics of Faith (London: T&T Clark International, 2004).
Wernberg-Møller, P., The Manual of Discipline: Translated and Annotated with an Intro-
       duction (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1957).
—‘A Reconsideration of the two Spirits in the Rule of the Community’, RevQ 3 (1961), pp.
       413–41.
Weiss I. H. (ed.), Sifra d’vey Rav (Vienna: Jacob Schlossberg, 1862).
Westerholm, S., Israel’s Law and the Church’s Faith (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1988).
—‘Paul and the Law in Romans 9–11’, in J. D. G. Dunn (ed.), Paul and the Mosaic Law
       (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1996), pp. 215–37.
—Perspectives Old and New on Paul: The ‘Lutheran’ Paul and His Critics (Grand Rapids:
       Eerdmans, 2004).
Willett, T. W., Eschatology in the Theodicies of 2 Baruch and 4 Ezra (Shefﬁeld: JSOT Press,
       1989).
Winninge, M., Sinners and The Righteous: A Comparative Study of the Psalms of Solomon and
       Paul’s Letters (ConBNT 26; Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell International, 1995).
Winston, D., ‘The Iranian Component in the Bible, Apocrypha and Qumran: A Review of the
       Evidence’, History of Religions 5 (1966), pp. 183–216.
—‘Freedom and Determinism in Philo of Alexandria’, SP 3 (1974–75), pp. 47–70.
—The Wisdom of Solomon: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary (AB;
       Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1979).
—‘Free Will’, in A. A. Cohen and P. Mendes-Flohr (eds), Contemporary Jewish Religious
       Thought: Original Essays in Critical Concepts, Movements, and Beliefs (London, New
       York: Macmillan, 1987), pp. 269–74.
Winston D., and J. Dillon (eds), Two Treatises of Philo of Alexandria.A Commentary on De
       Gigantibus and Quod Deus sit Immutabilis (Chico: Scholars, 1983).
Wise, M. O., Thunder in Gemini and Other Essays on the History, Language and Literature of
       Second Temple Palestine (Shefﬁeld: Shefﬁeld Academic Press, 1994).
                                        Bibliography                                        193

Wolfson, H. A., ‘Philo on Free Will and the Historical Inﬂuence of his View’, HTR 35 (1942),
      pp. 131–69.
—Philo. Foundations of Religious Philosophy in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam (2 vol.;
      Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1948).
Wrede, W., Paul (ET Edward Lummis, Lexington, KY: American Library Association
      Committee on Reprinting, 1962).
Wright, N. T., ‘The Paul of History and the Apostle of Faith’, TynBul 29 (1978), pp. 61–88.
—The Resurrection of the Son of God (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2003, p. 153).
Zeller, D., Charis bei Philon und Paulus (Stuttgarter Bibelstudien 142; Stuttgart: Katholisches
      Bibelwerk, 1990).
Ziegler, P. G., ‘Justiﬁcation and Justice’, Berliner Theologische Zeitschrift 21 (2004), pp. 140–
      53.
Ziesler, J. A., Romans (London: SCM Press, 1989), p. 176.
Zuckermandel, M. (ed.), Tosefta (Trier: Lintz, 1882).
                                    INDEXES


             INDEX OF BIBLICAL AND OTHER ANCIENT REFERENCES



                             OLD TESTAMENT

Genesis                 24.7             57          14.1       53
1          11, 29       33.17            141         15.1–11    113
1–3        27           33.19            149         22.8       62
1.28       29                                        22.9–11    104
2–3        168          Leviticus                    24.19      55
2.7        168          4.12             104         24.19–22   113
2.15       31, 58, 59   7.11–14          103         26.17–18   145
2.15–17    175          7.15             103         30.1       1–5
2.17       168          7.16–17          103         30.1–2     104, 105,
3.1        22           9.5–6            103                    107
3.1–7      31           17.3–4           103         30.12–14   101
3.2–3      166          18.4             66          30.15      145, 180
3.12–13    85           18.5             75, 101,    30.19      180
3.14       166                           102, 107,   30.19–20   115, 175
3.16       145                           116         30.20      115, 145
3.16–19    59           19.9–10          113         31.29      104, 105
3.17       166          19.19            104         32.2       57
4.1        142          23,22            113         32.39      115
5.1        41           25.35–38         113         33.3       114
6.1–4      12                                        33.3–4     114
6.8        141, 143     Numbers
                                                     Joshua
9.25       85           11               165, 166
                                                     18–19      45
12.3       101          11.1             165
14.22–23   142          11.19            165         1 Samuel
15.5       101          11.20            165         1.28       143
15.6       149          11.31–35         165         8          165
15.7       142          11.33            165         8.5        165
17.5       101          15.1–12          103         8.7         166
27.20      141          15.39            56          8.8        166
50.20      166          15.41            52, 53      8.11       166
                                                     8.13–14    166
Exodus                  Deuteronomy                  8.17       166
2.23       145          6.10–11     141              8.17–18    166
15.6       57           8.19
20.24      145          11.18       65               2 Samuel
22.25      113          12.11       104              7.16       11
                    Index of Biblical and Other Ancient References            195

2 Chronicles                   Ecclesiastes               18.20        12
28.27          106             2.14            14         36.26        179, 180
33.18          106             3.1–9           14
35.18          106             3.11            14         Daniel
                               5.8–9           14         7            17
Job                            7.14            15         9            17
4.14           71              8.3             14         12           17
4.17–19        87              9.2             14
3.2            14                                         Jonah
                               Isaiah                     4.2–3        14
9.32–33        14
                               43.12           69
15.14.16       87
25.4–6         87                                         Habakkuk
                               Jeremiah
                                                          2.4          101
                               16.11           58
Psalms                         18.18           13
16.7           60                                         Ancient Near-Eastern
                               21.8            175
78.29          165                                        Writings
                               24.7            178
81.13          165                                        Yasna
                               32.39           178
106.14–15      165                                        30.3–4       34–35
119.126        67              Ezekiel
143.2          87              7.26            13


                                         APOCRYPHA

Tobit                          8.20            84         10.6         84
1.3            83              8.31            84         10.10        84
1.4–5          83              11.10           84         10.15        84
1.8            16              13.20           84         10.15–11.1   84
1.10           83              14.10           84         11.15        84
3.3            83                                         11.23–24     84
3.14           83              Wisdom of Solomon          12.2–27      84
4.5–6          83              1.1–2         84           12.10–11     85
4.5–19         83              1.8           84           12.26        84
5.14           83              2.23–24       84           13.4         159
9.6            83              3.1–9         84           13.6–7       84
12.6–10        83              3.10          84           13.8–9       84
12.7           83              4.7–9         84           14.12        84
13.11          83              4.16          84           14.15–21     84
13.16          83              5.15          84           14.27        84
14.6           83              6.9           84           14.30–31     84
14.7           83              6.12          84           15.2–4       84
14.8           83              6.21          84
14.19          83              7.1–6         84           Sirach
                               7.7–11        84           2.8          85
Judith                         8.21–9.18     84           6.32–33      85
5.17           84              9.5           84           7.1–2        85
5.17–21        84              9.10–12       84           7.36         85
5.19           84              9.17–18       84           8.5          86
5.21           84              10.1          84           11.22        85
8.8            84              10.4          84           15.11–20     4, 16, 85
196                          Divine and Human Agency in Paul

Sirach (cont.)                    2 Maccabees               7.4          111
15.11–17.24      88               2.21           110        7.16         111
15.12–17         176              4.10–20        110        7.16–23      109
16.11–12         16               4.13           110        7.19         114
16.11–14         85               4.15           110        8–18         110
19.16            85               6.7            109        8.1          111
21.27            16, 85           6.1–9          110        8.8          110
23.4–6           86               6.12–17        17         8.16–26      109
24               16               7.9            17, 113    9.17         111
24.23            16               7.11           113        9.30         111
28.2             86               7.14           17, 113    10.19        114
28.4             86               7.23           17         12.13        109
33.10–15         86               7.29           113        13.1         111
35.5             85               8.1            110        13.3         111
35.24            85               14.38          110        13.5         111
37.3             86               14.46          113        13.7         111
37.15            86                                         13.15        114
42.24            86               4 Maccabees               13.19–27     109
44.17            86               1.1            87, 108,   14.13–19     109, 112
48.15            86                              110        15.1         111
48.17–49.5       106              1.1–3.18       110        15.3         114
49.4             86               1.3            87         15.23        111
                                  1.5            87         16.1         111
Baruch                            1.5–6          109        16.4         111
1.19–22          86               1.7            87         16.5–10      109
2.31             177, 178,        1.9            87         16.25        114
                 179, 180         1.14–30        108        16.32–7.1    111
2.31–32          86               1.17           111        17.12        114
3.7              86               2.4–6          112        17.16        111
4.1              16 86
                                  2.5            114        17.17        111
                                  2.8–9          113        17.17–22     109
1 Esdras
                                  2.21           112        17.18–19     114
1.23             87
4.36–38          87               2.21–23        109        17.20        111, 114
                                  3.2–5          112        18.1–2       111
1 Maccabees                       3.20           109        18.4         109
13.42             106             4.19–20        110        18.10        114
14.27            106              4.19–21        109        18.14–19     114–115
14.35            106              4.26           110        18.23        115
14.41–42         106              5–7            110
15.2             106              5.1–38         109        Prayer of Mannasseh
15.17            106              5.2–3          110        7–8           87
15.21            106              5.31           111
15.24            106              6.28–29        109
16.24            106              6.31           111


                                         PSEUDEPIGRAPHA

Ascension of Isaiah               2.4            92         Apocalypse of Abraham
1.9             92                3.11           92         13.7–14        90
                Index of Biblical and Other Ancient References               197

23.1–11    22              60.6            88         4 Ezra
23.6       22              63.6–9          88         3.21–22       22, 89
23.9–13    90              81.5            88         3.26          89
23.12      22              85.1–90.42      19         3.116–119     22–23
23.14      22              89.29–33        19         4.30          89
31.4–5     22              90.28–30        19         6.32          90
                           90.37–38        88         7.21–22       89
2 Baruch                   91.4            88         7.45–48       23
9.1        90              91.14           88         7.48          89
11.4       90              91.19           88         7.52–61       90
14.5–7     90              94.1            88         7.77          a90
18.2       90              94.3            88         7.88–89       89
19.1       90              94.4            88         7.92          89
21.11      90              94.6–11         88         7.118         89
21.13      24              95.5–7          88         7.127–131     23, 89
24.1       90              96.5–8          88         8.1–3         90
41.4       90              97.7–10         88         8.47–49       90
42.5       90              98.4            20, 88     9.10–12       89
44.7       24              98.8            88
44.15      24              104.6           88         Joseph and Aseneth
48.38–40   90              104.9           88         8.9           93
48.42–43   90                                         11.7–8        93
                           2 Enoch
51.10      24                                         12.5          93
                           2.2             89
51.16      90                                         15.7          93
                           9.1             89
52.6       24                                         19.5          93
                           18.4            89
54.14–19   24, 90                                     22.13         93
                           30.15           89
55.2       90                                         23.9           93
                           36.4            89
56.5–7     90                                         27.1          93
                           41.2            89
77.6–7     90                                         27.10         93
                           42.6            89
84.2–5     24
                           70.1            89
84.11      90                                         Jubilees
85.1–3     25              Epistle of Aristeas        1.7–14        92
85.14      25              16               91        1.9           19
                           18               91        1.15          92
1 Enoch                    130              91        1.20          92
1.9        88              144              16        1.22          92
5.4–5      88              154              17        1.23          92
6.1–8.3    88              231              91        2.17–22       92
6.4–6      13              237              91        2.21          19
6.8        13              238              91        2.25          92
10.9–10    13              248              91        2.31–33       92
10.21      88              271              91        5.13–16       92
12.17      88              272              91        5.17–18       92
15.8–10    13              274              91        6.17–19       92
27.2       88              277              91        7.27          92
38.1       88              278              92        7.33          19
45.1–2     88              283              91        8.3           92
46.5–8     88              290              91        10.8          92
50.2–3     88              292              91        11.5–6        92
198                    Divine and Human Agency in Paul

Jubilees (cont.)            16.11          94       1.8–9          90
12.20            92         18.12–14       94       5.4            91
15.25–27         92
15.26            92         Pseudo–Philo            Testament of Benjamin
15.31–32         92         1.16           93       3.3–4          90
15.33–34         92         4.11           93       3.4            20
16.17–18         92         4.16           93       6.1            90
17.17–18         92         6.3            93       6.7            20
18.9–12          92         11.1–2         93
19.28            92         12.2           93       Testament of Dan
21.21            92         12.4           93       1.3           90
22.16–18         92         12.9–10        93       4.7           90
22.22            92         13.8–9         93       5.1           90
23.10            92         16.3           93
30.14            92         16.4–5         93       Testament of Issachar
33.18            92         19.9           93       3.2–4           90
33.20            19         19.10          93       3.6–5.3         20
35.5             92         22.5           93       4.1             90
35.6             92         26.14          93       4.4             90
35.12            92         28.4            93      7.6–7           20
41.25            92         30.4           93       7.7             90
                            35.3           93
Life of Adam and Eve        38.1–2          93      Testament of Joseph
Apocalypse of Moses         49.3           93       1.3            91
10.2           93
13.5           93           Pseudo–Phocylides       Testament of Judah
16             93                        93         20.1–2         20
21.3–5         93
                                                    20.1–3         90
28.4           93           Testament of Abraham
30.1            93          1.4–7          91
                                                    Testament of Levi
32.2           93           4.6            91
                                                    19.1           90
                            9.4–6          91
Vita                        10.12–13       91
                                                    Testament of Naphtali
12–16           93          10.14          91
27.3            93                                  3.1            90
                            11.12          91
33              93                                  8.6            90
44.2            93          Testament of Job
                            8.2–3          91       Testament of Reuben
Psalms of Solomon           14.2–3         91       2.1–2          20
3.6–11         94           16.2           91       4.1            20
5.4            18           10.2           91       4.4            91
9.4            18           23.11          91       4.11            90
9.4–5          94           26.6           91
9.9            18           27.2–6         91       Testament of Simeon
10.1           18                                   3.5            90
10.1–3         94           Testament of the        5.2            90
13.6–11        94           12 Patriarchs
13.11          94           Testament of Asher      Testament of Zebulum
14.9–10        18           1.3–5          90       1.4–5          91
15.1           18           1.5            90       1.5–4.13       91
                 Index of Biblical and Other Ancient References               199


                                DEAD SEA SCROLLS

1QpHabakkuk                 4.25          29           1.10          95
7.10–12     94              4.26          29, 31, 45   8.9–15        95
8.1–3       94              5             38           13.5          46
8.8–13      94              5.1           94
                            5.3           45           1QpNahum (1Q169)
1QMysteries (1Q27)          5.4–5         178          4 iii 3–4   94
1i3           42            5.6           94
                            5.8            94          4QAges of Creation A
Community Rule (1QS)        5.10          94           (4Q180)
             37–38, 39      5.10–13       94           1.1–4         95
1–4          38             6.16          45
1.7          94             6.18–19       45           4QAges of Creation B
1.11         94             9.18–21       94, 95       (4Q181)
1.13–15      94             11.9–11       95           15            46
2.1–2        94
2.2–5        46             1QRule of the              Astrological Physiognomy
2.11–17      94             Congregation (1Q28a)       (4Q186)
3–4          172            1.2–3         94                          28, 39–41
3.13–15      28             1.16–17       45           4QSb           38
3.13–16      29                                        4QSc            38, 39
3.13–17      95             1QRule of Benediction      4QSd           38, 39
3.15         30             (1Q28b)
3.17–18      29             1.1–2         94           Damascus Document (CD)
3.17–21      95             4.25–26       45           2.2–13      42–44, 48
3.13–4.24    27, 95                                    2.14–16      94
                            1QHodayot (1QH a)
3.20         31                                        3.12        44–45
                            5.21–23      95
3.20–21      95                                        3.12–16      96
                            6.11–12      95
3.21–25      32, 95                                    7.4–6       94
                            6.17–18      94
3.23         31                                        13.3–4       45
                            7.16–26      95
3.24         31                                        13.12       43
                            9.7–8        95
3.25         29                                        20.3–4       46
                            9.20         95
3.25–26      29
                            9.21–23       95
4.4–6        39                                        4QDamascus Document a
                            10.23        178
4.6–8        32                                        (4Q266)
                            11.20–23     46
4.11–14      32             11.19–36     49                        44
4.15–16      29, 32         12.12–19     94
4.15–26      95             12.29–32     95            4QBrontologion (4Q318)
4.17         31             12.38        95                          39
4.18         31             14.6–7       94
4.18–23      33             14.21–24     95            4QHalakhic
4.19         29             15.12–13     94            Letter(4Q394–399)
4.20–22      30             17.14–17     95            B 1–2         103
4.21         31             21           178, 179      B3            103
4.22         31             25.28        95            B 9–13        103
4.23         30                                        B 26–27       103
4.23–24      31, 32         1QWar Scroll (1Q33)        B31–33        104
4.24         32             1.5           46           B 58–61       104
200                  Divine and Human Agency in Paul

C 7–8     103             C 20        104           4QSongs of the Sabbath
C 8–9     103             C 20–21     105           Sacriﬁce (4Q400–407)
C 9–10    94              C 21        107           402 4 12–15 41
C 12–16   104, 105        C 21–22     106, 107      406 1 1–2      41
C 12–21   107             C 23        106
C 14      107             C 23–26     106           4QRitual Marriage
C 14–15   104             C 23–31     94            (4Q502)
C 16      107             C 26–27     103                               39
C 17–21   105             C 26–32     107
C 17–22   106             C 27        107           11QPsalms a (11Q5)
C 18      105             C 30        107           19.15         95
C 18–19   104             C 31–32     105           24.7          95
C 19      105             C 32        107


                              NEW TESTAMENT

Matthew                   1.16–17     78, 170       2.6           164
13.33     58              1.17        170           2.6–11        74
13.34     159             1.18        77, 159,      2.7           74, 75, 163
24.2      159                         165, 170      2.8           21
25.34     159             1.18–21     130           2.10          74, 75
26.27     21              1.18–32     76, 159,      2.13          74, 75, 76
                                      161, 170      2.14          75, 76
Mark                      1.18–3.20   78, 170,      2.14–15       75
2.10      21                          171, 172      2.14–16       75
2.17      21              1.19–20     179           2.15          76
3.21      167             1.20        81, 159       2.17–24       76
8.35      64              1.20–21     130           2.17–30       74
10.6      159             1.21        81, 159,      2.25          76
13.19     159                         162           2.25–29       76
                          1.21–24     77            2.26          74, 76
Luke                      1.21–28     179           2.27          76
11.50     159             1.22        163           3             75
13.21     58              1.22–24     162           3.1–2         76
29.16     24              1.22–31     170           3.2           179
                          1.23–31     170           3.5           21
John                      1.24        2, 160, 162   3.8           150
8.58      23              1.25        164           3.8–20        149
                          1.25–27     163           3.9           77, 180
Acts                      1.26        2, 162, 164   3.9–18        179
1.23–26   45              1.26–27     160           3.9–20        76
4.27–28   166             1.27        164           3.10          73, 77, 88
7.42      165             1.28        2, 162, 163   3.19–20       78
                          1.28–31     160           3.20          21, 96
Romans                    1.32        75, 81, 160   3.21          159, 171
1         75, 158,        2           74            3.21–26       21, 132
          169, 170        2.1         130           3.23          76, 78
1.3       77, 81          2.1–2       170           3.23–24       78
1.16      78              2.1–11      130           3.24          78
             Index of Biblical and Other Ancient References               201

3.24–26    21           7.9          167, 168      10.5            75, 77, 101
3.22       3            7.10         77, 168       10.6–9          101
4.4–5      150          7.11         161, 168,     10.12–15        130
4.4–6      1                         18            10.12–11.7      130
4.5        78, 150      7.13         167, 168,     10.16–11.7      130
4.6        78                        171           11.1            76
4.13–16    77           7.14–23      59            11.1–2          179
4.16       101          7.14–25      168           11.1–6          149
4.16–18    101          7.15         161, 167      11.6            1, 99
4.17–25    137          7.15–25      74, 77        11.17–24        150
4.18       101          7.16         160           11.25–32        77
5          73           7.15         161           11.28           179
5–7        77, 79, 81   7.17         161           11.32           172, 179
5.6        78           7.18         161, 167      11.33–36        137
5.6–10     149          7.19         161           13.8–10         75
5.8        78           7.20         161           15.15–16        149
5.9        78           7.22         161, 167      15.15–19        152
5.10       78           7.23         161, 167      15.18           153
5.12       79, 81       7.24         161
5.12–21    149          7.24–25      23
                                                   1 Corinthians
5.12–8.8   77           7.25         167
                                                   1–2             138, 150
5.13       74           8            182
                                                   1.10–4.21       128
5.14       161          8.1          159
                                                   1.18            77, 136
5.17       78           8.1–4        171
                                                   1.18–19         180
5.19       77, 78, 81   8.1–13
                                                   1.18–25         136
5.20       79           8.3          168
                                                   1.18–31         102
5.20–21    172          8.7          169
                                                   1.23            136
5.21       79           8.7–8        81
                                                   2.2             136
6          96           8.8          88
                                                   2.4             180
6.1–11     77           8.14–15      132
                                                   2.4–5           136
6.6        180          8.18–25      183
                                                   2.6             138
6.12–22    180          8.28–30      130
6.15       150          8.29         180, 181,     2.7             137, 138
6.16–23    77, 79                    182, 183      2.9–16          180
6.20       21           8.29–30      48            2.10–16         138
7          71, 158,     9.4–5        76, 179       3.18–19         128
           160, 166,    9.6          149           3.18–23         128
           169, 171     9.6–13       1             3.21            128
7.1–6      160          9.6–29       149           4.6–7           128
7.7        160, 161,    9.11–12      99            4.7             128
           167, 168     9.12         99, 149       4.8             142
7.7–8      169          9.15         149           5.13            74, 79
7.7–12     160          9.16         149           6.9–10          74
7.7–13     166, 168     9.16–24      130           8.1–4           127
7.7–25     1, 159,      9.21         130           8.2             128
           160, 166     9.31         75, 81, 101   9.27            151
7.8        160, 161,    9.31–10.5    78            10.1–13         150
           167, 168     10.3         101           11.32           74, 79
7.8–11     168          10.3–5       81            12.4–31         180
202                        Divine and Human Agency in Paul

1 Corinthians (cont.)           2.17        96            Philippians
13.12          128              2.18–19     150           1.6            152
15             182              2.19        149           1.9            131
15.2           151              2.19–21     152           1.10           131
15.7–11        129              2.20        150, 153,     1.11           131
15.8           130                          154           1.19–20        151
15.9–10        1, 2, 127        2.20–21     148           1.28           79
15.10          133, 151,        2.21        79, 149       1.28–29        152
               153              3.1–5       132, 150      2.6–11         152
15.14          151              3.5         182           2.12–13        1, 102, 131
                                3.6–9       79            2.12–14        152
2 Corinthians                   3.7–8       77            2.13           153
1.6             134             3.8         148           3.2–9          78
2.8–9           149             3.8–9       101           3.3–4          76
2.15–16         77              3.10        77, 79        3.4–6          80
3.4–6           153             3.11        101           3.6            75, 76, 80,
3.7             77              3.12        75, 77, 101                  81, 150
3.7–11          80              3.13        77, 79        3.7–9          78, 129
3.9             77              3.14        77, 132       3.8            3
3.18            182             3.15        132           3.12–16        128
4.1–6           134             3.16–18     101           3.19–20        129
4.2             134             3.18        148           3.20–21        152
4.4             79, 134         3.21        78            4.10–20        135
5.14            167             3.22        77, 79, 172   4.11           135
6.1             151             3.26        132           4.12           135
9.6–10          149, 153        3.29        77            4.13           135, 152
6.11–13         164             4.5         77, 79
9.8             142, 153        4.5–7       132           Colossians
9.8–10          152             4.6         154, 180,     1.29           152
9.15            149                         182
                                4.8         163           1 Thessalonians
Galatians                       4.8–9       79            1.9–10         77
1.1             180             4.8–11      126           1.10           74, 79
1.3             148             4.19        181, 182,     2.13           131
1.6             148, 149                    183           2.16           79
1.11–12         180             4.24        77            4.13–18        182
1.11–17         129             5.13–6.10   153, 182      4.6            79
1.12            130             5.14        126           5.2–3          79
1.13            71, 78, 96      5.16        132, 153      5.2–9          74
1.13–14         78, 150         5.16–26     181           5.9            79
1.14            71, 80, 81      5.17        154           5.19           131
1.15            130             5.18        2, 132        5.23           131
1.15–16         148             5.19–23     181, 182
1.16            130             5.22        154           Hebrews
2.1             96              5.24        126, 154,     4.3            159
2.9             148, 149                    182           9.26           159
2.15            96              5.25        153, 154
2.15–17         79              6.14        150           II Peter
2.16            3, 96           6.16        181           3.4            159
                   Index of Biblical and Other Ancient References                 203

Revelation                    Quod Deterius Potiori       De Mutatione Nominum
13.8          159             Insidari Soleat             46            141
17.8          159             86              144         51–53         143

Jewish Authors                Quod Deus Immutabilis Sit   De Opiﬁcio Mundi
Josephus                      77–79        147            3            17
Antiquities                   86–116       141
3.223        83               87           142            De Posteriate Caini
6.269–270    159              104–106      141            16             147
13           48               107–109      141
13.171–173   15, 102          108          141            De Praemiis et Poenis
13.172       42, 95           109          143            24–27          142
13.172–173   4                                            36–46          147
13.230       106              De Ebrietate
13.259       106              105–110        142, 144     Quod Omnis Probus
13.267       106              118–119        143          Liber Sit
13.282–283   106                                          84           20
13.291       106              De Fuga et Inentione
13.299       106              166–176        147          Quaestiones et Solutiones
13.301       106              168            147          in Genesin
18.12–18     4                                            2.75           143
18.18        20, 95
                              Quis Rerum Divinarum
                                                          De Sacriﬁciis Abelis
                              Heres
War                                                       et Caini
                              5             143
1.70          106                                         42             147
                              102–111       142
2.162–166     102                                         52–58          144
                              104           142
                                                          57             144
Against Apion                                             124            143
                              Legum Allegoriae
1.42          83
                              1.34          144
1.60          83                                          Se Somniis
                              1.34–38       147
1.190–192     83                                          1.60            147
                              1.49          144
2.82          83                                          2.75–78         142
                              2.32          144
2.150         83
2.156         83              3.29–30       142           De Specialibus Legibus
2.178         83              3.77–96       143           1.10–12        142
2.228         83              3.97–103      147           1.43           143
2.184         83              3.137         144           4.187          141
2.220–224     83              3.166         141
                              3.211–215     145           De Virtutibus
Philo                         3.219         147           49              144
De Cherubim                   4             145–46        161–174         142
77          144                                           175             145
98–101      143               De Migratione Abrahami      183             145
125–130     142               26–33         147           184             145
                              30            141           185             145
De Confusione Linguarum       34–35         147           215             145
182           141             79–80         147
                              80            147           Early Christian Literature
De Decalogo                   123           144           Didache
178           142                                         1.1–6.2        28, 35
204                     Divine and Human Agency in Paul


                               RABBINIC LITERATURE

m.Avot                       b.Baba Metzia           Avot de–R. Nathan
2.4            64, 70        59b           67        A2            52
3.15           60                                    A 16          65
4.2            56, 65        b.Berakoth              A 25          56
                             17a           36        B 33          56
m.Berakhot                   40a           57
9.5            67                                    Mekhilta Bahodesh
                             b.Eruvin                2             57
m.Sanhedrin                  19a           68        5             62
10.1           44                                    6             52
                             b.Gittin
m.Sukkah                     44a           54        Melkhilta de–Rabbi
3.9            60                                    Ishmael
                             b.Menahot               Exod. 12.6    82
Pirqe ’Avot                  43b           56        Exod. 12.23 82
3.16           37                                    Exod. 13.4    82
                             b.Quiddushin            Exod. 14.29 82
Genesis Rabbah               30b          36, 65     Exod. 15.26 82
9.7           36, 65         81b          65         Exod. 19.2    82
42.4          61                                     Exod. 20.2–3 82
59.7          65             b.Rosh Hashanah
61.1          60             17a          68         Mekhilta de–R. Shimon
67.3          64                                     b. Yohai
69.3          69             b.Yoma                  Exod. 19.17 54
72.5          61             69b           65        Exod. 20.20 52, 63
82.10         61                                     Exod. 24.7     57
89.4          69             y.Sanhedrin
                             8./1          61        Mekhilta Neziqin
Leviticus Rabbah             105a          68        1              53
4.5            62
20.4           60            b.Shabbat               Mekhilta Vayyassa
36.4           61            32a           63        1             57

Lamentations Rabbah          b.Sukkah                Pesiqta de–Rav Kahana
petihta 34    65             52a–b         36        4.3           61
Lam. 1.6      68                                     12.1          59
                             y.Rosh Hashanah         12.6          69
Midrash Tannaim              1.3/8         62        15.5          58
              63             1.3/14–15     67        25.1          68

Targum Neoﬁti                y.Sanhedrin             Sifre Ahare–mot
Gen. 3.24     25             6.9/2         68        pereq 13.10   66

b.Avod. Zar.                 y.Sotah                 Sifre Behuqqotai
17a–b          65            1.4/4         61        pereq 8.10, fol. 112c
                                                                      54
                   Index of Biblical and Other Ancient References              205

Sifre Deuteronomy             115           52, 53, 55,   Tosefta Nega‘im
41             59                           60, 66        6.1            52
45             65
47             68             Sifra Qedoshim              Tosefta Peah
48             57             preeq 11.22    66           3.8            55
79             57
96             57             Sifre Shemini               Tosefta Sanhedrin
229            63             12.4          52            11.6          52
306            57, 64                                     13.2          68
346            69             Tosefta Haggai              13.4          68
                              2.2            61           14.1          52
Sifre Numbers
112           56


                              GRECO–ROMAN LITERATURE

Aeschylus                     1.19.15       122           4.1.100        118, 119,
Agamemnon                     1.28.20       119                          174
1052            167           1.29.3        121           4.1.101        175
                              1.30.3        121           4.1.104        119
Collectanea Rerum             2.1.6         121           4.4.33         122
Memorabilium                  2.2.3         118           4.4.47         124
34.9–12       19              2.8.6         119           4.7            135
                              2.8.11        120           4.7.2–3        135
Epictetus                                                 4.7.4          135
                              2.8.21–23     124
Dissertations                                             4.7.5          135
                              2.9.19–21     135
1.1.6           119                                       4.7.6–7        136
                              2.10.1        120
1.3.1           120                                       4.12.7–8       121
                              2.14.11–13    117
1.3.3           119                                       4.12.15        122
1.6.12–22       119           2.17.23–29    122
1.6.15          119           2.17.24       123
                              2.18.19       124           Euripides
1.6.18          119                                       Heracleidae
1.6.40          125           2.19.26–27    122
                              2.23.11       120           709–10         167
1.9.4           120
1.9.11          120           2.23.11–15    120
                                                          Orestes
1.9.16–17       120           3.1.40        121
                                                          1514           167
1.12.21         122           3.1.41        121
1.12.26–27      122           3.3.4         121           Homer
1.13.3          120           3.3.8         121           Odyssey
1.14            124           3.3.19        121           11.337         167
1.14.12         124           3.24.58       122
1.14.12–14      182           3.24.59       122           Lucretius
1.14.14         124           3.24.64–65    122           De Rerum Natura
1.14.15–16      124           3.24.114      124           2.251–293    177
1.17.21         120           4.1.56        118, 119
1.17.26         120           4.1.62        118           Xenophon
1.19.8–9        121           4.1.68        118           Memorabilia
1.19.11–15      122           4.1.99–104    118           2.1.21–33      176
                                INDEX OF MODERN AUTHORS



Albani, M. 39                                   Boyce, M. 33, 34
Albeck, C. 51                                   Brooke, G. J. 103
Alexander, L. 181                               Brown, A. R. 183
Alexander, P. S. 19, 28, 32, 37, 38, 39,        Buber, S. 51
      42, 45, 46, 47, 62, 74, 82, 95, 96,       Bultmann, R. 118, 155, 167
      140, 175, 177                             Burkert, W. 34
Allen, W. 73
Audet, J.-P. 35                                 Cancik, H. 39
Avemarie, F. 3, 52, 53, 57, 68, 83, 173,        Carroll, J. T. 137
      178                                       Carson, D. A. 3, 86, 87, 100, 140, 165
                                                Catto, S. 159
Badiou, A. 180                                  Charlesworth, J. H. 28, 41, 87
Baillet, M. 39                                  Chazon, E. G. 42
Balch, D. L. 181                                Chester, S. J. 160, 166, 168, 172
Barclay, J. M. G. 73, 74, 78, 84, 91, 93,       Chialà, S. 21
      108, 110, 139, 148, 150, 174              Cohen, A. A. 61
Barr, J. 34                                     Cohen Stuart, G. H. 36
Barth, K. 80                                    Cohon, S. S. 36
Bauckham, R. J. 87, 88                          Collins, J. J. 12, 15, 87, 178
Baumgarten, J. M. 39                            Cosgrove, C. H. 137
Beattie D. R. G. 106                            Cousar, C. B. 183
Becker, A. H. 22                                Cranﬁeld, C. E. B. 170
Becker, H.-J. 39, 51, 57
Beer, G. 51                                     Das, A. A. 168
Bell, R. H. 61                                  Davies, P. R. 19, 42
Bernstein, M. J. 103, 106                       Davies, W. D. 33
Betz, H. D. 167                                 Di Lella, A. 85, 86
Betz, O. 106                                    Dillon, J. 141
Birnbaum, E. 148                                Donaldson, T. L. 92
Blenkinsopp, J. 13                              Duchesne-Guillemin, J. 33
Bloch, M. 10, 11                                Duff, N. J. 181
Bobzien, S. 173, 175                            Dunn, J. D. G. 22, 101, 107, 110, 148,
Boccaccini, G. 9, 11, 12, 15, 17, 18, 19,             165
      21, 24, 25, 48, 71, 73, 81, 82, 85, 91,   Dupont-Sommer, A. 38
      177, 178
de Boer, M. C. 177, 178, 180                    Engberg-Pedersen T. 3, 4, 8, 73, 126, 151,
Bonhöffer, A. 118,                                    154, 155, 156, 174, 175, 181, 182
Bonsirven, J. 50, 56, 61                        Epstein, J. N. 51
Bourdieu, P. 139                                Evans, C. A. 47, 101
                                Index of Modern Authors                             207

Ferguson, E. 181                             Klostermann, E. 162
Fields, W. W. 46                             Knibb, M. A. 28
Finkelstein, L. 33, 51                       Kraft, R. A. 46
Fletcher Louis, C. H. T. 30                  Kohler, K. 56, 61
Flint, P. W. 32, 39                          Kunin, S. D. 62
Flusser, D. 35, 176
Fisch, M. 27                                 Laato, T. 71, 72, 73
Fitzgerald J. T. 176                         Lange, A. 49
Furnish, V. P. 179, 182                      Lapide, P. 71
                                             LaPorte, J. 142
García Martínez, F. 19, 38, 94, 103          Lapsley, J. 181
Garin, E. 11                                 Lasker, D. J. 63
Gathercole, S. J. 8, 77, 81, 94, 100, 101,   Lauterbach, J. Z. 82
     108, 165, 170, 180                      Leaney, A. R. C. 28
Gaventa, B. R. 179                           Licht, J. 28
Gnoli, G. 35                                 Lichtenberger, H. 36, 39, 58, 178
Goldin, J. 61                                Lehmann, P. L. 181
Goodenough, E. R. 146                        Leibowitz, J. 70
Goodman, M. 111                              Lieberman, S. 51
Gowan, D. E. 86                              Lim, T. H. 104
Graetz, H. 176                               Long, A. A. 118, 119, 120, 121, 124, 125,
Grabbe, L. L. 10, 13                               173, 182
Grenet, F. 33, 34                            Longenecker, B. W. 150
                                             Longenecker, R. N. 148
Hammer, R. 63
                                             McCann, D. P. 182
Harrington, D. J. 112
                                             McFarland, I. A. 172
Harrison, J. 143, 148
                                             McKeon, R. 62
Harrisville, R. A. 183
                                             McNamara, M. J. 106
Hay, D. M. 3                                 Malherbe, A. J. 5, 118, 178, 179
Hayman, A. P. 27                             Mandelbaum, B. 51
Hays, R. B. 179                              Manekin, C. H. 61, 62, 70
Hengel, M. 80                                Manning, G. T. 179
Hoffmann, D. 51                              Marcus, J. 178
Horovitz, H. S. 51                           Margulies, M. 51
van der Horst, P. W. 65                      Martone, C. 28
Hruby, K. 60                                 Martyn, J. L. 3, 8, 78, 80, 148, 153, 154,
Hultgård, A. 33                                    155, 156, 179, 180, 182, 183
                                             Meeks, W. A. 137, 179, 181
Jaffee, M. S. 12                             Melamed, E. Z. 51
Jastrow, M. 60, 62, 63                       Metso, S. 38
Jenson, P. P. 11                             Meyer, P. W. 180
Johnson, E. E. 3, 137                        Merrill, E. H. 19, 49
Joyce, P. M. 181                             Milgrom J. 165
                                             Millar, F. 111
Kaminsky, J. S. 181                          Miller, P. D. 182
Kampen, J. 103, 106                          Mittmann-Richert, U. 65
Kant, I. 6                                   Moffatt, J. 140
Kelner, M. M. 61                             Monteﬁore, C. G. 72, 80
Kennedy, H. A. A. 140                        Moore, G. F. 36, 48, 50, 57, 61
208                       Divine and Human Agency in Paul

Nickelsburg, G. W. E. 10, 12, 20, 87, 88      Stegemann H. 28
Neusner, J. 23, 27                            Stöhr, M. 70
Newsom, C. A. 41                              Stone, M. E. 89
Noack, C. 146                                 Stowers, S. 100
                                              Stott, J. R. W. 169
O’Brien, P. T. 3, 86, 87, 100, 140, 165       Strawson, P. F. 49
                                              von Stuckrad, K. 39
Paul, S. M. 46                                Stuhlmacher, P. 71
Philonenko, M. 33
Porter, S. E. 47                              Tanner, K. 4, 7
Puech, E. 38                                  Thackeray, H. St. J. 83
                                              Theissen, G. 166
Qimron, E. 103                                Theodor, J. 51
                                              Thom, J. C. 182
Rabin, C. 42                                  Tigchelaar, E. 103
Rabin, I. A. 51                               Trebolle Barrera, J. 19
Räisänen, H. 75, 102
Reed, A. Y. 22                                Urbach, E. E. 36, 50, 52, 61, 63
Rendell Harris, J. 146
Rietbrock, I. 50                              VanderKam, J. H. 12, 32, 33, 37, 39
Romm, D. 51                                   Vawter, B. 14
                                              Vermes, G. 28, 29, 38, 45, 111
Sacchi, P. 12, 21
Safrai, S. 60                                 Watson, F. B. 3, 73, 80, 85, 87, 97, 100,
Sagi, A. 67                                         127, 148, 174, 176, 180
Saldarini, A. J. 15                           Webster, J. 172
Sanders, E. P. 2, 10, 50, 51, 52, 54, 56,     Wernberg-Møller, P. 28
      72, 73, 75, 86, 87, 97, 101, 148, 152   Weiss, I. H. 51
Sandmel, S. 80                                Westerholm, S. 73, 79, 148, 180
van de Sandt, H. 35, 176                      White, M. L. 176
Schäfer, P. 39                                Widengren, G. 33
Schechter, S. 36, 50, 51, 52, 57, 61          Willett, T. W. 24
Schiffman, L. H. 15, 37, 39, 46, 103          Williamson, C. 50
Schneewind, J. B. 4, 6, 173                   Winninge, M. 73, 78
Schoeps, H. J. 71                             Winston, D. 33, 86, 141, 146
Schrage, W. 179                               Wise, M. O. 40
Schreiner, T. R. 163                          Wolfson, H. A. 48, 146
Schürer, E. 111                               Wrede, W. 79
Segal, A. F. 25                               Wright, N. T. 100, 114
Seifrid, M. A. 3, 86, 87, 100, 140, 165
Shaked, S. 33                                 Zeller, D. 140, 141, 143, 147
Sharp, C. J. 103, 104                         Ziegler, P. G. 181
Skehan, P. W. 85, 86                          Ziesler, J. A. 169
Steck, O. H. 178                              Zuckermandel, M. 51
